The NP-Completeness of Some Edge-Partition Problems
Ian Holyer y
SIAM J. COMPUT, Vol. 10, No. 4, November 1981 (pp. 713-717) c 1981 Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics 0097-5397/81/1004-0006 $1.00/0

n Abstract. We show that for each ﬁxed 3 it is NP-complete to determine whether an arbitrary graph Kcan be edge-partitioned into subgraphs isomorphic to the complete graph n. The NP-completeness of a
number of other edge-partition problems follows immediately.

Key words. computational complexity, NP-complete problems, edge-partition problems

1. Introduction. Many graph theory problems have been shown to be NP-complete and so

are believed not to have polynomial time algorithms. Garey and Johnson [1] give an account of

the theory of NP-completeness, a list of known NP-complete problems and a bibliography of the subject. In particular, they list several NP-complete vertex-partition problems [1, p. 193] including

vertex-partition into cliques [2] and vertex-partition into isomorphic subgraphs [3].

In this paper, we consider some similar problems for edge-partitions. We deﬁne the edge-

partition problem EPn as follows. Given a graph G = V; E, the problem is to determine whether

the edge-set E
a subgraph of

can be partitioned into subsets
G isomorphic to the complete

gEr1a,phE2K, n: :

: in such a way that on n vertices. Our

each main

Ei generates
result is that

the problem EPn is NP-complete for each n 3. From this we deduce that a number of other

edge-partition problems are NP-complete.

In order to show that EPn is NP-complete, we will exhibit a polynomial reduction from

the known NP-complete problem 3SAT which is deﬁned as follows. A set of clauses C =

fC1; C2; : : : ; Crg in variables
als li;1; li;2; li;3 where a literal

lui;1j,uis2

, : : : ,us
either a

is given, each
variable uk or

clause Ci consisting its negation uk. The

of three problem

literis to

determine whether C is satisﬁable, that is, whether there is a truth assignment to the variables

which simultaneously satisﬁes all the clauses in C. A clause is satisﬁed if one or more of its

literals has value “true”.

2. The main theorem. Our ﬁrst task is to ﬁnd a graph which can be edge-partitioned into
Kn’s in exactly two distinct ways. Such a graph can be used as a “switch” to represent the two

possible values “true” and “false” of a variable in an instance of 3SAT.
For each n  3 and p  3 we deﬁne a graph Hn;p = Vn;p; En;p by

Vn;p

=


x

=

x1;

:

:

:

;

xn

2

Znp

:

Xn

xi



 0

;

i=1

f E i; j y xn;p = xy : there exist such that k k

for k 6= i; j and yi  xi + 1; yi  xj , 1g

n

, w1he-rdeimtheenseiqouniavlatloenrucsesTanr,e1m=odSu1lo

p. S

1

Note
::

:thaSt 1H, na;npdctahnatbteherelogcaardl esdtruacstuermeboefdHdend;piins

the the

same for each p (see Fig. 1). The properties of Hn;p are given in the following lemma.

Received by the editors July 18, 1979, and in ﬁnal form January 7, 1981 yUniversity Computer Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, England. This work was supported by the British Science Research Council.

1

(3,0,-3) (2,0,-2) (1,0,-1)

(0,0,0) (1,-1,0) (2,-2,0) (3,-3,0)

(i) (ii)

Figure 1: (i) H3;3 embedded in the (2-dimensional) torus. Opposite sides are identiﬁed as shown. (ii) The local structure of H4;p. The edges of a single K4 are shown.

((Liii)E)TMThMheeAdl.eagTrrgheeeestgorcfaoepmahcphHlevtnee;prstuehbxagsirstah2pe,hn2fois.lloKwni,nagnpdroapneyrKtie3s:is contained in a unique Kn.

(iii) The number of Kn’s containing a particular vertex is 2n.

(iv) Each edge occurs in just two Kn’s.

(v) Each two distinct Kn’s are either edge-disjoint or have just one edge in common.

(vi) There are just two distinct edge-partitions of Hn;p into Kn’s.

Proof. (i) By translational symmetry we need only consider 0 = 0; : : : ; 0. This is adjacent

, ,to 1; 1; 0; : : : ; 0 are distinct modulo

and
p as

the
p

distinct points 3). There are

colbetaarilnyed2,fn2romof

it by permuting these.

its

coordinates

(0;

1;

1

(ii) By translation and coordinate permutation we may assume that a largest complete subgraph

contains the vertices 0 = 0; : : : ; 0, 1; ,1; 0; : : : ; 0 and 1; 0; ,1; 0; : : : ; 0. It is then forced

to be the standard Kn, which we call K and whose vertices are:

0; 0; 0; : : : ; 0
1; ,1; 0; : : : ; 0 1; 0; ,1; : : : ; 0
:::
1; 0; 0 : : : ; ,1

,(iii) The Kn’s containing 0 are obtained from K and its inverse K by cyclic permutation of
the coordinates. Thus there are 2n of them.
(iv) We need only consider a particular edge containing the vertex 0 and check that it is con-
tained in just two of the Kn’s given in (iii). (v) If two Kn’s are not disjoint, we may assume that they have vertex 0 in common. We may
then use (iii) to check that they have just one more vertex in common.
(vi) The edges containing 0 can be partitioned in at most two ways, and these extend to the
,whole of Hn;p. All the Kn’s are obtained from K or K by translation. One edge-partition ,consists of the translates of K, and the other consists of the translates of K.
We now make the following deﬁnitions. The T-partition of Hn;p (corresponding to logical value “true”) consists of the translates of K, and the F-partition (corresponding to “false”) consists
,of the translates of K. Two Kn’s in Hn;p are called neighbors if they have a common edge.
A patch is a subgraph of Hn;p consisting of the vertices and edges of a particular Kn and of

2

its neighbors. It is a T-patch if the central Kn belongs to the T-partition, and it is an F-patch

otherwise. Two patches P1, P2 in Hn;p are called noninterfering if the distance dx; y in Hn;p
2 2between vertices x V P 1 and y V P2 is always at least 10, say. THEOREM. The edge-partition problem EPn is NP-complete for each n 3. f gProof. The problem EPn is clearly in NP. Suppose we have an instance C = C1; C2; : : : ; Cr

of 3SAT in s variables u1,
this instance of 3SAT to an

u2, : : : ,
instance

us where each Ci consists Gn = Vn; En of EPn as

of literals follows.

li;1,

li;2,

li;3.

We

reduce

Choose p sufﬁciently large so that up to 3r noninterfering patches can be chosen in Hn;p say

p = r100 . Take a copy Ui of Hn;p to represent each variable ui and copies Ci;1, Ci;2 and Ci;3 of

Hn;p to represent each clause Ci.

Join these copies of Hn;p together as follows. If literal li;j is uk, then identify an F-patch of

Ci;j with an F-patch of Uk. If li;j is uk, then identify an F-patch of Ci;j with a T-patch of Uk as

indicated for n = 3 in Fig. 2.

a fe d

bc

cb

d ef

a

Figure 2: The identiﬁcation of an F-patch with a T-patch when n = 3. Similarly labelled vertices
(and the edges between them) are identiﬁed.
Also join Ci;1, Ci;2 and Ci;3 for each i by identifying one F-patch from each and then removing the edges of the central Kn (see Fig. 3).
Choose all those patches which occur in a single copy of Hn;p to be noninterfering. Denote by Gn = Vn; En the graph obtained in this way. We now show that there is an edge-partition of Gn into Kn’s if and only if the instance C of 3SAT is satisﬁable. Suppose that there is an edge-partition of Gn into a set S of Kn’s, and consider a particular copy H of Hn;p involved in the construction of Gn. Take a Kn in S, say A, which is in H, but not near any join. Using the properties in the lemma, we see that the neighbors of A do not belong to S, the neighbors of the neighbors of A do belong to S, and so on. Continuing in this way, we deduce that all the edges of H, except perhaps those involved in joins, are T-partitioned, or all F-partitioned. Thus we may say that H is T-partitioned or F-partitioned. Now suppose li;j is uk and consider the join between Ci;j and Uk. We claim that the edges in the vicinity of this join can be edge-partitioned into Kn’s if and only if at least one of Ci;j, Uk is T-partitioned. If (say) Ci;j is T-partitioned, this accounts for all the edges of Ci;j near the
joining patch except for those of the patch itself. The patch can then be regarded as belonging
to Uk which can then be locally partitioned in either way. If on the other hand both Ci;j and Uk
are F-partitioned, the argument of the previous paragraph shows that the edges of the patch not
belonging to the central Kn are forced to belong to the F-partitions of both Ci;j and Uk, which is
a contradiction.
Similarly, if li;j is uk, then either Ci;j is F-partitioned or Uk is T-partitioned. Now consider the join between Ci;1, Ci;2 and Ci;3. We claim that the edges in the vicinity of this join can be edge-partitioned into Kn’s if and only if exactly one of Ci;1, Ci;2, Ci;3 is Fpartitioned. The argument is the same as above, except that now, as the central Kn is missing, the remaining edges of the patch must be claimed by an F-partition in exactly one of Ci;1, Ci;2, Ci;3.
3

Figure 3: The join between Ci;1, Ci;2 and Ci;3 when n = 3.

Thus if Gn can be edge-partitioned into Kn’s, then there is a truth assignment to u1, : : : , us which satisﬁes C, namely uk has value “true” if and only if Uk is T-partitioned.
If C is satisﬁable, we partition Gn by partitioning Uk according to the truth of uk in a satisfying assignment, choosing one “true” literal li;j for each i, and F-partitioning the corresponding Ci;j.

It should be clear that the above reduction from 3SAT to EPn can be carried out using a
polynomial time algorithm, and so the proof of the theorem is complete.

3. Deductions. The following problems are now easily seen to be NP-complete.
(i) Find the maximum number of edge-disjoint Kn’s in a graph (n 3).

(ii) Find the maximum number of edge-disjoint maximal cliques in a graph.

(iii) Edge-partition a graph into the minimum number of complete subgraphs.

(iv) Edge-partition a graph into maximal cliques.
(v) Edge-partition a graph into cycles Cm of length m.

For (i) we use the same construction as for EPn. For (ii), (iii) and (iv) we use the same

construction as for EP3. Note that G3 contains no K4’s, and every edge K2 is in a K3, so the

maximal cliques coincide with the K3’s.

For (v) we alter the construction occur in three distinct directions, say

for EP3 in the following way. Note a, b and c, and that the joins in the

that the edges construction of

iGn 3Ha3r;ep

,made so that edges which are identiﬁed have the same direction. In G3, replace each edge with
direction a (say) by a path of m 2 edges.

We conjecture that the problem of edge-partitioning a graph into subgraphs isomorphic to a
ﬁxed graph H is NP-complete for all graphs H with at least 3 edges. The problem is polynomial if H has at most 2 edges, and it is easy to show that the problem is NP-complete for a number of particular small, connected graphs H. The NP-completeness of the problem seems difﬁcult to prove if H is disconnected, e.g., if H = 3K2, that is, H has 6 vertices and 3 independent edges.

REFERENCES

[1] M.R. GAREY AND D.S. JOHNSON, Computers and Intractability, W.H.Freeman, San Francisco, 1979.

4

[2] R.M. KARP, Reducibility among combinatorial problems, in Complexity of Computer Computations, R.E. Miller and J.W. Thatcher, eds., Plenum, New York, 1972, pp. 85-103. [3] D.G. KIRKPATRICK AND P. HELL, On the complexity of a generalized matching problem, in Proc. 10th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, 1978, pp. 240-245.
5

