A Survey on Genome Rearrangement Problems
and Gene Order Based Phylogenies
Pedro C. Feija˜o and Joa˜o Meidanis
Institute of Computing, University of Campinas, 13081-970 Campinas, SP.
Abstract. With the growing availability of complete genome sequence
data, the genome rearrangement problem has received a lot of attention
in the field of computational biology. In this problem, a genome is mod-
eled as a sequence of regions that are conserved within a genome group.
The goal is to find a plausible evolution scenario for this genome group,
considering the position and orientation of the conserved regions, build-
ing a phylogenetic tree using pairwise distance estimates, optionally also
rebuilding the ancestral genomes. This methodology has shown encour-
aging results when applied to the phylogenetic inference of several species
groups. In this article, we review the state-of-the-art and applications in
this field.
1 Introduction
Most of molecular phylogeny research is based upon the analysis of DNA and
aminoacids sequences of individual genes or groups of genes. However, with the
advent of completely sequenced genomes, these approaches are complemented
by genome-wide comparisons.
The reconstruction of evolutionary scenarios using gene order information is
a powerful tool and has been used to gain a better understanding of the evolu-
tion of several groups of species, such as mammals [8, 9], yeast [21], microbial
genomes [17] and the entire metazoan kingdom [22].
In this survey, we will review recent advances on genome rearrangement prob-
lems and gene order based phylogenies. In Section 2 we describe recent genome
rearrangement methods for the pairwise parsimonious distance calculation. Sec-
tion 3 introduces the application of statistical models to find better estimates of
such distances, and in Section 4 we talk about phylogenetic inference based on
genome rearrangement events.
2 Pairwise Genome Rearrangement
The inference of evolutionary scenarios based on gene order started with the
study of the genome rearrangement problem [38]: given two genomes, represented
as sequences of conserved segments — called syntenic blocks by Bourque and
colleagues [8] —, find the most parsimonious sequence of rearrangement events
that converts one genome into the other. In this sense, the distance between
these two genomes is the sum of the weight of each these events.
The initial approaches considered the case where the orientation of all genes
is known and both genomes share the same gene set, without gene duplication.
In this case, genomes can be represented as signed permutations over a set of
integers, where each integer denotes a gene and its sign denotes the orientation.
We are interested in the most parsimonious rearrangement scenario, which
uses the fewest rearrangement operations to convert one permutation into an-
other. Finding this scenario can be a hard problem, depending on the allowed
rearrangement operations. The most commonly used operations are unsigned
reversal, signed reversal, transposition, block-interchange, fission, fusion and
translocation. Each of these operations will be discussed through this section.
The first approaches considered a simpler case, where just one operation is
allowed. In this type of problem, the rearrangement distance is defined as the
minimum number of events needed to transform one permutation into another.
Some algorithms find the distance only, while others also find the sequence of
rearrangement events. Since transforming one permutation into another is usu-
ally equivalent to transforming one permutation into the identity, finding the
minimum sequence of events is called sorting.
The most often used operations are reversals. Unsigned reversal is an opration
that inverts the order of a block of adjacent genes, and signed reversal also
inverts the sign of each gene in the block. The unsigned reversal problem is NP-
hard [10]. The signed reversal has drawn much more attention, since it seems
to be more biologically relevant and fast algorithms are currently available. We
will use the term “reversal” to refer to the signed case. The minimum number
of reversals required to convert one signed permutation into another is called
reversal distance.
Hannenhalli and Pevzner solved the reversal distance problem in O(n4) [24].
It was the first polynomial algorithm for a realistic model of genome rearrange-
ment. Several faster implementations followed [5, 26] and the reversal distance
can be calculated in linear timer [1], but the best sorting algorithm — which
also finds the optimal sequence of reversals — runs in O(n3/2
√
log n) [53].
The reversal operation is largely used on phylogenetic models based on gene
order mainly because there is an efficient algorithm to calculate reversal dis-
tances and also because it is biologically relevant, unlike some previous distance
measures, such as the breakpoint distance. We will give further details on this
topic on the next sections.
Another largely studied rearrangement operator is the transposition, where
two consecutive adjacent blocks are exchanged, without changing gene orienta-
tion. Since the work of Bafna [2], it was studied on several papers [12, 15, 19, 29].
The complexity of transposition sorting is still an open problem, and the current
approaches strive to find the best approximation algorithms. The best algorithm
so far is by Elias and Hartman [19], with a factor of 1.375. Dias and Meidanis
[15] worked with a new related operator, the prefix transposition, where the first
gene of the permutation is always moved. In their work, some bounds are given
for the prefix transposition distance, as well as approximation algorithms with
factor 2 and 3.
Another related operation is the block-interchange, which is a generalization
of the transposition, where the exchanged blocks may not be consecutive. It
was introduced Christie [13], and the block-interchange sorting problem can be
solved in O(n2). More precisely, the algorithm complexity is O(δn), where δ is
the block-interchange distance, which can be calculated in O(n) in advance, as
shown by Lin et al. [32]. On recent works, the block-interchange operation was
used along with signed reversal [40, 33], and linear time algorithms are available
when appropriate weights are used.
When multi-chromosomal genomes are considered, additional rearrangement
operations are needed. The first studied multi-chromosomal operation was the
translocation, defined by Kececioglu and Ravi [27] and Hannenhalli [23], where
two chromosomes exchange blocks at their ends. Recently, Bergeron and col-
leagues [3] found an error on Hannenhalli’s linear algorithm. In the same article,
they developed a new theory and showed a linear algorithm for the translocation
sorting problem.
Another multi-chromosomal operations are fissions and fusions. In the fission
operation, a chromosome is cut between two genes, forming two new chromo-
somes. The fusion is the inverse operation, joining two different chromosomes
into one. Algorithms that use these operations usually include a third opera-
tion to move genes within the same chromosome. Dias and Meidanis [14] solved
the problem using fissions, fusions and transpositions in O(n2). It was the first
polynomial algorithm for a rearrangement problem involving transpositions. Us-
ing fissions, fusions and block-interchanges, Lu et al. [35] developed an O(n2)
algorithm.
Some works focus on finding a general rearrangement operation that can be
used to model several different operations.
Yancopoulos and colleagues [55] introduced a new concept of a unifying op-
eration, called double-cut-and-join, further developed by Bergeron et al. [4], that
models the most useful rearrangement events.
A more theoretical approach is the one by Meidanis and Dias [37], where they
use the theory of permutation groups to develop a rearrangement theory with
a strong algebraic formalism. With this formalism many diferent operations can
be easily modelled.
This type of unified operation can potentially simplify both rearrangement
theory and algorithms.
To this point, we have reviewed genome rearrangement studies where the
genomes have the same set of genes, without repetition. In practice, this is seldom
the case. Gene duplication, deletion and horizontal transfers are abundant [31]
and it is unlikely that genomes from different species satisfy this condition. One
approach to this question is trying to find a common set of markers (genes,
syntenic blocks), discarding duplicated genes or genes that are present in only
one of the genomes [6, 8].
Another approach aims at understanding gene loss and gain mechanisms, try-
ing to develop rearrangement models that allow these kind of operations, such
as gene deletion and duplication. One of the first studies in this direction was
done by El-Mabrouk [18], extending the classic reversal theory of Hannenhalli
and Pevzner [24] with the addition of gene insertions/deletions of contiguous
segments. Marrom and Swenson [36] further developed El-Mabrouk’s results al-
lowing gene duplications. They also developed an approximation algorithm for
the distance calculation under this model, and experimental results suggest that
its performance is near optimal. On a follow-up work [50], some improvements
were included, such as an estimate of the “true” evolutionary distance between
genomes, which is calculated applying an empirical correction factor on the re-
arrangement distance.
Another line of research focusing uniquely on gene gain and loss events is
from Koonin and coleagues [28, 41], aiming to reconstruct a set of ancestor genes
which is universal to all analyzed species. The hypotetical species comprising this
set of genes was called last universal common ancestor (LUCA). Starting with
a set of homolog genes, they showed that the phyletic patterns — presence-
absence gene patterns on whole sequenced genomes — are not compatible with
the hypotetical tree of the analyzed species. They developed algorithms that
search for the most parcimonious evolutinary scenario, minimizing gene loss and
gain events on a given tree. These algorithms allow different penalties for gain
and loss, as there is evidences showing that losses are more frequent. The greater
the gene gain penalty, more genes are present in the LUCA. After testing with
different penalties the authors concluded that gene gain and loss may actually
occur with the same frequency, and that horizontal gene transfer is an important
factor in the evolution of prokaryotes.
3 Statistical estimates of evolutionary distance
A known issue on parsimonious distances, such as rearrangement distances, par-
ticularly in the context of phylogeny reconstructions, is the tendency of underes-
timating the evolutionary distance, notably with distant species. In the case of
nucleotide mutations, for instance, since the Jukes-Cantor model of 1969, several
statistical models where developed to better estimate the evolutionary distance,
constructing more accurate phylogenies with the same data set [20, Cap. 11].
Unfortunately, as we saw in the previous section, the calculation of the par-
simonious rearrangement distance is not as easy as the local mutation distance,
giving rise to an NP-hard problem on several cases. Possibly because of this
difficulty, statistical models of rearrangement evolution were not studied un-
til recently. Such models would enable the inference of confidence intervals on
distance estimations, as well as hypothesis testing about evolution mechanisms.
The first approaches focused on applying an empirical correction factor to
the parsimonious rearrangement distance. One example is the EDE — empiri-
cally derived estimator — of Moret et al. [43], which is applied on the reversal
distance. In a recent work, this estimator was compared to the uncorrected re-
versal distance when constructing phylogenies with distance-based methods, and
generated trees with better quality.
Some recent approaches attempt to create statistical models for rearrange-
ment evolution. Durret, York and colleagues worked on Bayesian models for rear-
rangement distance based on Markov chain Monte Carlo methods (MCMC). In a
first attempt [56], the model calculated an estimate of the reversal distance. This
model was improved on a subsequent article [16] to allow for multi-chromosomal
genomes, adding the translocation operation. Another similar line of research
is the work of Miklo´s [39], where a Bayesian model was developed to estimate
distance allowing the transposition operation, in addition to reversals.
Further enhancements were included in a recent article [57], where the size of
the reversed block is considered reversal probabilities, and pericentric – including
the centromere – and paracentric – not including the centromere – reversals also
have different probabilities, as it is believed that the pericentric reversals are
more frequent.
These contributions show that phylogeny reconstruction based on distance
estimates perform better than parsimonious distances. Furthermore, the study
of statistical models of rearrangement is of key importance to the understanding
of large-scale evolutionary processes.
4 Rearrangement-based phylogeny
In Section 2 we reviewed several methods of calculating rearrangement distances
between two genomes. In this section, we focus on the more general case: is
it possible to calculate rearrangement distances between a group of genomes,
inferring their evolutionary history, possibly reconstructing ancestral genomes?
Methods of phylogenetic tree reconstruction are divided in three classes [20]:
i) distance-based, which use pairwise distance to establish evolutionary relations;
ii) maximum parsimony, which looks for the tree with the minimum number of
evolutionary events; iii) maximum likelihood, which reconstruct the most likely
phylogenetic tree according to a well-defined probabilistic model of evolution.
Distance-based methods are computationally less demanding. After calculat-
ing a pairwise distance matrix of all genomes in the analyzed group, an algorithm
such as Neighbor-Joining or Minimum Evolution is applied [20]. One of the first
studies that built trees based on rearrangement distances used the breakpoint
distance, defined as the number of genes that are adjacent on one genome but
not on the other. Although very easy to calculate, breakpoint distance does not
have a significant biological meaning. An alternative would be using more rele-
vant distances, such as the reversal distance, but as we discussed, parsimonious
distances may not be suitable for phylogeny reconstruction, given their tendency
to underestimate the “true” distance. To support this claim, Wang et al. [54]
tested breakpoint and reversal distances versus an empirical estimator, the EDE.
The estimator recovered better phylogenies than both parsimonious distances.
Distance-based methods are fast and can build good trees, but cannot infer
the ancestral genomes matching the internal nodes of the phylogenetic tree.
The problem of reconstructing a tree with ancestral genomes with the minimum
number of rearrangement events, creating a plausible evolution scenario is called
Multiple Genome Rearrangement Problem (MGRP) [47].
The parsimonious approach has been used to solve the MGRP. Although
there are instances where the pairwise rearrangement distance problem is easy,
such as the reversal distance, this is not extended in a multiple genome context.
Even the simplest case, with only three genomes, called reversal median problem
(RMP) — finding the ancestral genome with minimal sum of reversal distances
— is NP-hard [11].
Using a simpler distance measure for the median problem, the breakpoint
distance, Sankoff and Blanchette proposed the first solution to the MGRP, with
their software BPAnalysis [46]. After an initialization step, their algorithm it-
erates over a tree, repeatedly resetting the permutations of internal nodes to
breakpoint medians of their three neighbors, until convergence is achieved. They
discovered a reduction of the breakpoint median problem to the Traveling Sales-
man Problem (TSP) and were able to compute medians relatively efficiently.
Later, Moret and colleagues developed GRAPPA [43], based on BPAnalysis.
Their algorithm runs much faster, with the use of better TSP bounds and paral-
lelized algorithms. With the availability of a linear algorithm for reversal distance
calculations [1], breakpoint distance was replaced by reversal distance [42], ob-
taining better results. Several improvements were integrated into GRAPPA in
the last years: faster exact algorithms for the RMP [48]; inclusion of the distance
estimate EDE [44]; implementation of the disk-covering method [25, 45] for large
phylogenetic tree reconstructions [51]; the use of Linear Programming to cal-
culate better bounds and speed up the branch-and-bound [52]; quartet-based
phylogeny reconstruction [34].
Another algorithm for the MGRP was developed by Bourque and Pevzner
[7], the MGR-MEDIAN. In this algorithm, the RMP is not solved exactly. An
heuristic searches for good reversals — reversals that bring one of the genomes
closer to the other two — and applies them iteratively. When a good reversal is
not found, a search to find the best reversal according to several tested criteria is
performed. Although there is no clear evidence of better results, MGR-MEDIAN
is significantly faster than GRAPPA, because it does not solve the RMP exactly.
As we saw in Section 2, pairwise distance rearrangement algorithms allowing
gene gain and loss events are quite recent, with the work of El-Mabrouk [18]
being one of the first formal approaches. The same is true for phylogenetic re-
construction. Lake and Rivera [30] developed a method allowing horizontal gene
transfer, using similar techniques as in nucleotide substitution models. Partic-
ularly, they used Markov chains with states A and P, representing absence or
presence of a gene in a genome. They introduced the concept of conditioning
genome (CG), a chosen set of genes. The CG is fundamental to the state attri-
bution, for a gene is considered A (absent) in a certain genome only if it is not
present in neither the genome and the CG. In a recent work, Spencer et al. [49]
evaluate this algorithm, finding good results. They were particularly interested
in the choice of the conditioning genome and showed that, in some instances, dif-
ferent CGs lead to strong support for very different phylogenies. They proposed
a supertree method to solve this inconsistency, combining information obtained
with all the different CGs.
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we reviewed the state-of-the-art and recent applications in genome
rearrangement problems. This methodology has shown encouraging results when
applied to evolutionary distance estimation and the phylogenetic inference of
several species groups, complementing other widely used approaches such as
DNA sequence-based methods.
There are several promising research directions within this field. First, in
pairwise parcimonious distance calculation, most of the developed theory and
algorithms allow just one operation. We need better sorting algorithms that
allow several rearrangement operations, possibly resulting in more significative
distance measures. There are even fewer works that consider gene gain/loss op-
erations, but we believe that algorithms that examine this type of operations
would be extremelly important, especially in procaryote models of evolution.
All these ideias should also be extended to the MGRP, where there is the
predominant use of signed reversals. Some authors already pointed out that
MGRP algorithms that allow more operations can produce better evolutionary
scenarios.
In parallel with these problems, advances in rearrangement theoretical back-
ground, such as the double-cut-and-join unified operation of Yancopoulos or the
algebraic formalism of Meidanis and Dias can simplify both rearrangement the-
ory and algorithms.
Finally, recent results in statistical models of rearrangement have shown that
this is a promising area with vast room for exploration.
Bibliography
[1] Bader, D. A., Moret, B. M., and Yan, M. (2001). A linear-time algorithm
for computing inversion distance between signed permutations with an exper-
imental study. J Comput Biol, 8(5):483–491.
[2] Bafna, V. and Pevzner, P. A. (1998). Sorting by transpositions. SIAM J.
Discrete Math., 11(2):224–240.
[3] Bergeron, A., Mixtacki, J., and Stoye, J. (2006a). On sorting by transloca-
tions. J Comput Biol, 13(2):567–578.
[4] Bergeron, A., Mixtacki, J., and Stoye, J. (2006b). A unified view of genome
rearrangements. In Algorithms in Bioinformatics, volume 4175 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, pages 163–173. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg.
[5] Berman, P. and Hannenhalli, S. (1996). Fast sorting by reversals. In
Combinatorial Pattern Matching, Proceedings of the 7th Annual Symposium
(CPM’96), number 1075 in Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 168–
185.
[6] Blair, J. E., Shah, P., and Hedges, S. B. (2005). Evolutionary sequence
analysis of complete eukaryote genomes. BMC Bioinformatics, 6:53.
[7] Bourque, G. and Pevzner, P. A. (2002). Genome-scale evolution: reconstruct-
ing gene orders in the ancestral species. Genome Res, 12(1):26–36.
[8] Bourque, G., Pevzner, P. A., and Tesler, G. (2004). Reconstructing the
genomic architecture of ancestral mammals: lessons from human, mouse, and
rat genomes. Genome Res, 14(4):507–516.
[9] Bourque, G., Zdobnov, E. M., Bork, P., Pevzner, P. A., and Tesler, G. (2005).
Comparative architectures of mammalian and chicken genomes reveal highly
variable rates of genomic rearrangements across different lineages. Genome
Res, 15(1):98–110.
[10] Caprara, A. (1997). Sorting by reversals is difficult. In RECOMB ’97: Pro-
ceedings of the first annual international conference on computational molec-
ular biology, pages 75–83, New York, NY, USA. ACM Press.
[11] Caprara, A. (1999). Formulations and hardness of multiple sorting by re-
versals. In Proceedings of the third annual international conference on com-
putational molecular biology, pages 84–93. ACM Press.
[12] Chen, M. and Lee, R. (2004). Sorting by transpositions based on the first
increasing substring. In Bioinformatics and Bioengineering, 2004. BIBE 2004.
Proceedings. Fourth IEEE Symposium on, pages 553–557.
[13] Christie, D. A. (1996). Sorting permutations by block-interchanges. Infor-
mation Processing Letters, 60:165–169.
[14] Dias, Z. and Meidanis, J. (2001). Genome rearrangements distance by fu-
sion, fission, and transposition is easy. In Proceedings of the String Processing
and Information Retrieval: 8th International Symposium, SPIRE 2001, pages
250–253.
[15] Dias, Z. and Meidanis, J. (2002). Sorting by prefix transpositions. In Pro-
ceedings of the String Processing and Information Retrieval: 9th International
Symposium, SPIRE 2002, volume 2476/2002 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 463–468. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg.
[16] Durrett, R., Nielsen, R., and York, T. L. (2004). Bayesian estimation of
genomic distance. Genetics, 166(1):621–629.
[17] Earnest-DeYoung, J. V., Lerat, E., and Moret, B. M. (2004). Reversing
gene erosion – reconstructing ancestral bacterial genomes from gene-content
and order data. In Algorithms in Bioinformatics, 4th International Workshop,
WABI 2004, volume 3240 of Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics, pages 26–37.
Springer-Verlag.
[18] El-Mabrouk, N. (2001). Sorting signed permutations by reversals and in-
sertions/deletions of contiguous segments. Journal of Discrete Algorithms,
1(1):105–122.
[19] Elias, I. and Hartman, T. (2006). A 1.375-approximation algorithm
for sorting by transpositions. Computational Biology and Bioinformatics,
IEEE/ACM Transactions on, 3(4):369–379.
[20] Felsenstein, J. (2004). Inferring Phylogenies. Sinauer Associates, Sunder-
land, MA.
[21] Fischer, G., Rocha, E. P. C., Brunet, F., Vergassola, M., and Dujon, B.
(2006). Highly variable rates of genome rearrangements between hemias-
comycetous yeast lineages. PLoS Genet, 2(3):e32.
[22] Fritzsch, G., Schlegel, M., and Stadler, P. F. (2006). Alignments of mito-
chondrial genome arrangements: applications to metazoan phylogeny. J Theor
Biol, 240(4):511–520.
[23] Hannenhalli, S. (1996). Polynomial-time algorithm for computing translo-
cation distance between genomes. Discrete Appl. Math, 71(1–3):137–151.
[24] Hannenhalli, S. and Pevzner, P. A. (1999). Transforming cabbage into
turnip: Polynomial algorithm for sorting signed permutations by reversals.
Journal of the ACM, 46(1):200–223.
[25] Huson, D. H., Nettles, S. M., and Warnow, T. J. (1999). Disk-covering, a
fast-converging method for phylogenetic tree reconstruction. J Comput Biol,
6(3-4):369–386.
[26] Kaplan, H., Shamir, R., and Tarjan, R. E. (1999). Faster and simpler
algorithm for sorting signed permutations by reversals. Society for Industrial
and Applied Mathematics, Jornal on Computing, 29(3):880–892.
[27] Kececioglu, J. D. and Ravi, R. (1995). Of mice and men: Algorithms for
evolutionary distances between genomes with translocation. In Proceedings
of the sixth ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithm, pages 604–613.
Society of Industrial and Applied Mathematics.
[28] Koonin, E. V. (2003). Comparative genomics, minimal gene-sets and the
last universal common ancestor. Nat Rev Microbiol, 1(2):127–136.
[29] Labarre, A. (2006). New bounds and tractable instances for the trans-
position distance. Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, IEEE/ACM
Transactions on, 3(4):380–394.
[30] Lake, J. A. and Rivera, M. C. (2004). Deriving the genomic tree of life in
the presence of horizontal gene transfer: conditioned reconstruction. Mol Biol
Evol, 21(4):681–690.
[31] Lawrence, J. G. and Hendrickson, H. (2003). Lateral gene transfer: when
will adolescence end? Mol Microbiol, 50(3):739–749.
[32] Lin, Y. C., Lu, C. L., Chang, H.-Y., and Tang, C. Y. (2005). An efficient
algorithm for sorting by block-interchanges and its application to the evolution
of vibrio species. J Comput Biol, 12(1):102–112.
[33] Lin, Y. C., Lu, C. L., Liu, Y.-C., and Tang, C. Y. (2006). Spring: a tool for
the analysis of genome rearrangement using reversals and block-interchanges.
Nucleic Acids Res, 34(Web Server issue):W696–W699.
[34] Liu, T., Tang, J., and Moret, B. M. E. (2005). Quartet-based phylogeny
reconstruction from gene orders. In Proceedings of the 11th Annual Inter-
national Conference in Computing and Combinatorics (COCOON 05), pages
63–73.
[35] Lu, C. L., Huang, Y. L., Wang, T. C., and Chiu, H.-T. (2006). Analysis
of circular genome rearrangement by fusions, fissions and block-interchanges.
BMC Bioinformatics, 7:295.
[36] Marron, M., Swenson, K. M., and Moret, B. M. E. (2004). Genomic dis-
tances under deletions and insertions. Theor. Comput. Sci., 325(3):347–360.
[37] Meidanis, J. and Dias, Z. (2000). An alternative algebraic formalism for
genome rearrangements. In Sankoff, D. and Nadeau, J., editors, Comparative
Genomics, pages 213–223. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
[38] Meidanis, J. and Setubal, J. C. (1997). Introduction to Computational
Molecular Biology. PWS Publishing.
[39] Miklo´s, I. (2003). MCMC genome rearrangement. Bioinformatics, 19 Suppl
2:II130–II137.
[40] Mira, C. and Meidanis, J. (2007). Sorting by block-interchanges and signed
reversals. In Information Technology, 2007. ITNG ’07. Fourth International
Conference on, pages 670–676.
[41] Mirkin, B. G., Fenner, T. I., Galperin, M. Y., and Koonin, E. V. (2003).
Algorithms for computing parsimonious evolutionary scenarios for genome
evolution, the last universal common ancestor and dominance of horizontal
gene transfer in the evolution of prokaryotes. BMC Evol Biol, 3:2.
[42] Moret, B. M., Siepel, A. C., Tang, J., and Liu1, T. (2002a). Inversion
medians outperform breakpoint medians in phylogeny reconstruction from
gene-order data. In Algorithms in Bioinformatics: Second International Work-
shop, WABI 2002, Rome, Italy, September 17-21, 2002. Proceedings, volume
2452/2002 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 521–536. Springer
Berlin / Heidelberg.
[43] Moret, B. M., Wang, L. S., Warnow, T., and Wyman, S. K. (2001). New ap-
proaches for reconstructing phylogenies from gene order data. Bioinformatics,
17 Suppl 1:S165–S173.
[44] Moret, B. M. E., Tang, J., Wang, L.-S., and Warnow, T. (2002b). Steps
toward accurate reconstructions of phylogenies from gene-order data. J. Com-
put. Syst. Sci., 65(3):508–525.
[45] Roshan, U. W., Moret, B. M. E., Warnow, T., and Williams, T. L. (2004).
Rec-I-DCM3: A fast algorithmic technique for reconstructing large phyloge-
netic trees. In Proceedings of the IEEE Computational Systems Bioinformatics
conference (CSB’04), pages 98–109, Los Alamitos, CA, USA. IEEE Computer
Society.
[46] Sankoff, D. and Blanchette, M. (1998). Multiple genome rearrangement and
breakpoint phylogeny. J Comput Biol, 5(3):555–570.
[47] Sankoff, D., Sundaram, G., and Kececioglu, J. D. (1996). Steiner points in
the space of genome rearrangements. International Journal of Foundations of
Computer Science, 7(1):1–9.
[48] Siepel, A. (2001). Exact algorithms for the reversal median problem. Mas-
ter’s thesis, Cornell University.
[49] Spencer, M., Bryant, D., and Susko, E. (2007). Conditioned genome recon-
struction: how to avoid choosing the conditioning genome. Syst Biol, 56(1):25–
43.
[50] Swenson, K. M., Marron, M., Earnest-DeYoung, J. V., and Moret, B. M.
(2005). Aproximating the true evolutionary distance between two genomes.
In 7th Workshop on Algorithm Engineering and Experiments (ALENEX05),
pages 37–46. SIAM Press.
[51] Tang, J. and Moret, B. M. E. (2003). Scaling up accurate phylogenetic
reconstruction from gene-order data. Bioinformatics, 19 Suppl 1:i305–i312.
[52] Tang, J. and Moret, B. M. E. (2005). Linear programming for phyloge-
netic reconstruction based on gene rearrangements. In Proceedings of the 16th
Annual Symposium on Combinatorial Pattern Matching (CPM 2005), pages
406–416.
[53] Tannier, E. and Sagot, M.-F. (2004). Sorting by reversals in subquadratic
time. In Combinatorial Pattern Matching, volume 3109 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 1–13s. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg.
[54] Wang, L.-S., Warnow, T., Moret, B. M. E., Jansen, R. K., and Raubeson,
L. A. (2006). Distance-based genome rearrangement phylogeny. J Mol Evol,
63(4):473–483.
[55] Yancopoulos, S., Attie, O., and Friedberg, R. (2005). Efficient sorting of ge-
nomic permutations by translocation, inversion and block interchange. Bioin-
formatics, 21(16):3340–3346.
[56] York, T. L., Durrett, R., and Nielsen, R. (2002). Bayesian estimation of
the number of inversions in the history of two chromosomes. J Comput Biol,
9(6):805–818.
[57] York, T. L., Durrett, R., and Nielsen, R. (2007). Dependence of paracentric
inversion rate on tract length. BMC Bioinformatics, 8:115.
