A 3/2-Approximation Algorithm for Sorting by Reversals (Errata)
David A. Christie

The description of reversal graphs given in [1] is incorrect. The following modiﬁcations should be made.

0

4

21

35

Give black edges of the cycle graph G(π) a direction from π(i) to π(i+1). For a particular black edge (π(i), π(i + 1)), the tail is π(i) and the head is π(i + 1).

Change the deﬁnitions of oriented and un-

oriented cycles of G(π) as follows: A cycle is

unoriented if every grey edge in the cycle con- 0

4

31

25

nects the head of a black edge to the tail of a

black edge. Otherwise a cycle is oriented.

Change the deﬁnition of the reversal graph R(C) as follows: For each pair of adjacent elements in π that are not connected by a black edge in the cycle graph, introduce an isolated blue vertex1. For each grey edge g in G(π) introduce a vertex vg. Vertex vg is coloured blue if g is part of a cycle C in C in which g connects the head of a black edge to the tail of a black edge. Otherwise vg is coloured red. (The edges of the graph are deﬁned in the same way as before.)
Change the way that a reversal ρ(u) aﬀects the cycle graph as follows: Let u be a vertex of R(C) that arises from cycle C. If u is blue then after applying ρ(u), do not remove any black or grey edges from the resulting cycle graph.
1Below we change the cycle graph so that sometimes elements that form an adjacency are still connected by a black edge.

Figure 1: Do not remove the edges with labels {3,4}.
(This ensures C still exists in the resulting cycle graph.) If u is red and C is length greater than 2, then remove only the grey and black edges from u to u + 1. Examples are shown in Figures 1 and Figures 2, in which it is important that some black and grey edges are not removed. (Thanks to Thorsten Frings for pointing out these examples.)
Redeﬁne a k-reversal to be a reversal in which k pairs of black and grey edges are removed from the cycle graph.
With these modiﬁcations the rest of the paper is correct, though the proofs of some lemmas need some straightforward alterations.
My thesis contains an alternative deﬁnition

1

05

14

23

6

05

41

23

6

Figure 2: Do not remove the edges with labels {4,5}.
of reversal graphs that is much neater than the above scheme.
Please send any other corrections to errata at krispo dot com.
References
[1] David A. Christie. A 3/2-approximation algorithm for sorting by reversals. In Proceedings of the Ninth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 244–252, San Francisco, California, 25–27 January 1998.

2

