Iatehdee Dedhctioa foe AC-like EdhTtioaTl
Theoeief with Homomoechifmf
Pqssql Lqvoursqtu1;2, Tunys Luwyuz2, qnt bqlv druynun1?
1 WSa7 PYS op Nlnsly 1 NY]S UX] CA43 1 TY]TL Futurs przupnt SPNST
7 D4235 Nlnsly7 Frlynp7 hhhd.//kkk.lgj.ebg-cachab.ff/rolafcifca,hfeibeb}
2 WTF7 Uytvprstté Ltx8Xlrsptwwp 1 1 NY]S UX] A1AA7 13453 Xlrsptwwp Npopx 137
Frlynp7 hhhd.//kkk.cai.ibij-afg.ff/rligien
Abstract. Nryptzrrlpstn prztznzws lrp sxlww przrrlxs wstns tyvzwvp
l strs wpvpw zq nzynurrpyny lyo wstns lrp ot)nuwt tz lylwyzp my slyo9
Tsp xzst sunnpssquw xptszos tz vprtqy suns prztznzws rpwy zy rpwrtttyr
tpnsytqups lyo lutzxltpo opounttzy ty zropr tz txpwpxpyt zr xtxtn tsp
prznpss nlwnuwus opsnrtmtyr tsp prztznzw pxpnuttzy9
bp qznus zy tsp tytruopr opounttzy przmwpx7 tslt ts tsp vuwyprlmtwtty tz
plsstvp lttlnvs7 ty prpspynp zq spvprlw vlrtlyts zq LN 8wtvp lxtzxs 3qrzx
LN tz Lmpwtly rrzups7 tynwuotyr tsp tspzry zq pxnwustvp or4 lyo szxz8
xzrpstsx wstns lrp tsp xzst qrpqupyt lxtzxs lrtstyr ty nryptzrrlpstn
prztznzws9 Szwuttzys lrp vyzwy qzr tsp nlsps zq pxnwustvp or7 zq Lmpwtly
rrzups7 lyo zq szxzxzrpstsx lwzyp9 Ty tsts plppr wp loorpss tsp nzx8
mtylttzy zq tspsp LN 8wtvp tspzrtps wtts tsp wlw zq szxzxzrpstsx wstns
wplos tz xuns xzrp nzxpwpx opntstzy przmwpxs9
bp przvp opntolmtwtty zq tsp tytruopr opounttzy przmwpx ty lww nlsps nzy8
stoprpo9 Our opntstzy prznpourp ts ty Pc[TTXP7 pxnppt qzr l rpstrtntpo
nlsp ty wstns wp slvp mppy lmwp tz rpt l [TTXP opntstzy prznpourp
ustyr l przpprty zq zyp8nzuytpr lyo pussozwy lutzxltl9
1 IagebdhVgiba
Sryptowrqpxys protosols qru uryquytous yn tystryrutut somputynw qpplysqtyons.
s© cprynwur-furlqw
dxuy qru umployut vor ynstqnsu yn ynturnut rqnkynw, vytuo on tumqnt survysus,
wyruluss sommunysqtyon, or susuru eNYh survysus lyku ssh or scp. Sryptowrqpxys
protosols sqn ru tussryrut qs rulqtyvuly symplu prowrqms wxysx qru u“usutut yn
qn untrustut unvyronmunt. dxusu protosols usu sryptowrqpxys prymytyvus yn ortur
to ymplumunt symmutrys 8sxqrut-kuy9 unsryptyon, qnt qsymmutrys 8purlys-kuy9
unsryptyon qnt sywnqturus.
furyvyynw protosols ys notoryously ty.sult, qnt uvun vury symplu protosols
wxysx look somplutuly xqrmluss mqy xqvu suryous susuryty -qws, qs yt wqs trq-
mqtysqlly tumonstrqtut ry txu ruw ov txu Nuutxqm-csxroutur protosol vount
ry Lowu kADm usynw q motul-sxuskynw tool. Yt took AG yuqrs synsu txu protosol wqs
purlysxut to ,nt txu -qw, q so-sqllut rfs ns yme rniiqe fyyfhp. An ovurvyuw ov
? Tsts wzrv wls plrttlwwy suppzrtpo my tsp rpsplrns przrrlxs LNT8ST ]zsstryzw7 lyo
]YTW []OUaÉ 3y 03 a 3A049
fzymesynhfynts uwtythtqx known q tusqtu qwo sqn ru vount yn kEm, q moru rusunt
tqtq rqsu ov protosols qnt known -qws ys kAAm. dxusu protosols qru ovtun ym-
plumuntut yn smqll vqryqnts wxysx tyur vrom txu orywynqlly proposut protosol,
or qru usut yn somrynqtyon wytx otxur protosols. As q sonsuquunsu, txuru ys q
multytutu ov vury,sqtyon prorlums, wxysx rqysus txu nuut vor fzytrfynh tools.
dxuru qru tyurunt qpproqsxus to motulynw sryptowrqpxys protosols qnt qnq-
lyzynw txuyr susuryty propurtyusJ prosuss sqlsuly lyku txu xun2hfqhzqzx kAm, so-sqllut
sryptowrqpxys proovs 8suu, vor ynstqnsu, kBm9, qnt txu qpproqsx ov Toluv qnt iqo
kA0m wxysx sonsysts yn motulynw qn qttqskur ry q tutustyon systum. dxys tutus-
tyon systum spusy,us xow txu qttqskur sqn ortqyn nuw ynvormqtyon vrom pruvyous
knowlutwu, wxysx xu xqs uytxur ortqynut ry syluntly uqvustroppynw txu sommu-
nysqtyon rutwuun xonust protosol pqrtysypqnts 8yn sqsu ov q ufxxnve qttqskur9,
or ry uqvustroppynw qnt vrqutuluntly umyttynw mussqwus, txus provokynw xonust
protosol pqrtysypqnts to ruply qssortynw to txu protosol rulus 8txys ys txu sqsu
ov q so-sqllut fhynve qttqskur9. gu sqll nsywziew ieizhynts uwtgqer txu quustyon
wxutxur q pqssyvu uqvustroppur sqn ortqyn q surtqyn ynvormqtyon vrom knowl-
utwu txqt xu orsurvus on txu nutwork. dxu Toluv-iqo qpproqsx lunts ytsulv to
qutomqtyon synsu txu quustyon wxutxur txu yntrutur sqn ortqyn q surtqyn ynvor-
mqtyon now rutusus to txu quustyon wxutxur txys ynvormqtyon sqn ru tutusut
usynw q surtqyn tutustyon systum.
Slqssysqlly, txu vury,sqtyon ov sryptowrqpxys protosols wqs rqsut on txu so-
sqllut uewkehy hwyuytlwfumy fxxzruynts wxysx stqtus txqt yt ys ympossyrlu to or-
tqyn qny ynvormqtyon qrout qn unsryptut mussqwu wytxout knowynw txu u“qst
kuy nusussqry to tusrypt txys mussqwu. dxys qssumptyon qllowut q supqrqtyon ov
vury,sqtyon tqsks ynto provynw lowur rounts vor txu sryptqnqlysys ov txu srypto-
wrqpxys prymytyvus on txu onu xqnt, qnt vury,sqtyon ov q tystryrutut prowrqm on
txu otxur xqnt. envortunqtuly, txys purvust sryptowrqpxy qssumptyon xqs provun
too ytuqlystysJ txuru qru protosols wxysx sqn ru provun susuru untur txu purvust
sryptowrqpxy qssumptyon, rut wxysx qru yn ruqlyty ynsusuru synsu qn qttqskur sqn
usu propurtyus ov txu sryptowrqpxys prymytyvus yn somrynqtyon wytx txu protosol
rulus yn ortur to ortqyn knowlutwu ov q susrut. dxusu propurtyus qru typysqlly
u“prussut qs uquqtyonql q“yoms 8so-sqllut qlwurrqys propurtyus9, lyku vor ynstqnsu
qssosyqtyvyty qnt sommutqtyvyty ov surtqyn opurqtors. Alwurrqys propurtyus mqy
ru ussuntyql vor txu u“usutqrylyty ov txu protosol, or mqy zust somu ynto plqy
rusqusu txu sryptowrqpxys prymytyvus umployut ry txu protosol xqppun to sqt-
ysvy txusu propurtyus. A rusunt ovurvyuw ov qlwurrqys propurtyus ov sryptowrqpxys
prymytyvus, txuyr usu to mount qttqsks on protosols, qnt u“ystynw rusults on vury,-
sqtyon ov sryptowrqpxys protosols yn prusunsu ov uquqtyonql q“yoms sqn ru vount
yn kHm.
A numrur ov rusults xqvu ruun ortqynut, rotx vor txu yntrutur tutustyon
prorlum qnt vor txu prusurvqtyon ov susrusy untur qstyvu qttqsks. gu xuru only
muntyon somu rusults wxysx qru ov pqrtysulqr ruluvqnsu to txu prorlums stutyut
yn txys workJ txu yntrutur tutustyon prorlum yn sqsu ov txu uquqtyonql q“yoms ov
exhqzxnve tw ys tusytqrlu kFm yn polynomyql tymu kDm, qnt yn sqsu ov txu uquqtyonql
q“yoms ov Arulyqn wroups ys tusytqrlu kFm3 yn polynomyql tymu kAIm. Lykuwysu, txu
yntrutur tutustyon prorlum ys tusytqrlu yn polynomyql tymu kGm yn txu sqsu ov
txu uquqtyonql txuory ov qn xomomorpxysm. Notu txqt txu two uquqtyonql txuo-
ryus ov exhqzxnve tw qnt ov xomomorpxysm motul rqsys propurtyus ov ymportqnt
sryptowrqpxys prymytyvusJ
 Exhqzxnve tw ys q rqsys ruyltynw rlosk yn mqny symmutrys unsryptyon mutxots
8vor ynstqnsu TUc or txu moru rusunt AUc9 or uvun usut tyrustly qs qn
unsryptyon mutxotK
 Xomomorpxysms qru uryquytous yn sryptowrqpxy, ry u“qmplu txu UlWqmql
unsryptyon mutxot xqs txys propurty. Notu txqt mqny protosols somrynu
symmutrys qnt qsymmutrys unsryptyon.
 cymmutrys unsryptyon mutxots wxysx ovtun work on tqtq rlosks ov ,“ut
syzu qru yn txu symplust ov sqsus 8txu so-sqllut eqehywtsnh htiegttp rtie9
xomomorpxysqlly u“tuntut to tqtq struqms ov qrrytrqry syzu.
comu u“qmplus ov qttqsks qwqynst protosols usynw txu uquqtyonql txuoryus son-
syturut yn txys pqpur sqn ru vount yn kHm.
Yn txys pqpur wu ynvustywqtu txu yntrutur tutustyon prorlum yn prusunsu ov
suvurql vqryqnts ov txu uquqtyonql txuory ov qssosyqtyvyty qnt sommutqtyvyty
8sxort FC 9 ov q rynqry opurqtor ⊗, plus txu xomomorpxysm propurty ov q unqry
vunstyon symrol ovur txu FC opurqtor. dxu vqryqnts ov FC wxysx wu sonsytur
qruJ puru FC, txu txuory ov exhqzxnve tw 8qlso sqllut FCUS 9, qnt txu txuory
ov Arulyqn wroups. gu qru vurtxurmoru ynturustut yn txu somrynqtyon ov txusu
FC -lyku txuoryus wytx q wunurqlyzqtyon ov onu xomomorpxys vunstyon to somu
vorm ov tystryrutyvyty ov txu unsryptyon opurqtor ovur txu rynqry opurqtor ⊗.
dxu xomomorpxysm lqw ys txun ruplqsut ry q lqw stqtynw txqt txu unsryptyon ov
txu ⊗ ov two mussqwus ys uquql to txu ⊗ ov txu unsryptyons ov txu two mussqwus
usynw txu sqmu unsryptyon kuy. gu to not qssumu txqt txu sut ov unsryptyon kuys
ys ,nytu. bqtxur, qny turm sqn ru usut qs qn unsryptyon kuy. dxys sqn ru suun
qs txu u“tunsyon to qn yn,nytu vqmyly ov xomomorpxysms, onu vor uqsx possyrlu
unsotynw kuy. Our rusults sqn ru summqryzut qs vollowsJ
A. dxu yntrutur tutustyon prorlum ys tusytqrlu. Yt ys NP-somplutu yn sqsu ov
txu txuory FC plus xomomorpxysm, qnt wu xqvu qn u“ponuntyql-tymu uppur
rount vor txu uquqtyonql txuory FCUS plus xomomorpxysm qnt Arulyqn
wroups plus xomomorpxysm.
B. dxu yntrutur tutustyon prorlum ys yn qll txruu sqsus tusytqrlu yn polyno-
myql tymu yv wu rustryst txu slqss ov prorlums to txu so-sqllut gnsfwy sqsu,
txqt ys txu sqsu wxuru txu sut ov qssumptyons qnt txu woql to not sontqyn
qpplysqtyons ov ⊗ to moru txqn two turms.
C. dxu ,rst two suts ov rusults sqrry ovur to txu wunurqlyzqtyon wxysx sonsysts
yn ruplqsynw txu xomomorpxys vunstyon ry qn unsryptyon opurqtyon wxysx
tystryrutus ovur ⊗.
3 Ty qlnt7 tsp Y[8opntstzy prznpourp ty tsp nlsp zq Lmpwtly rrzups rtvpy my fAh nly
lwsz mp txprzvpo tz optprxtytsttn pzwyyzxtlw ttxp ustyr tsp tpnsytqups pxpwltypo
ty tsts rppzrt9
gu vollow txu qpproqsx ov kFm qnt kGm wxysx sonsysts yn q wunurqlyzqtyon ov
]sAllustur7s qthfqnyy mutxot u“plqynut yn custyon C.
Plqn ov txu pqpurJ gu prusunt yn custyon B txu Toluv-iqo motul ov yntrutur
sqpqsytyus u“tuntut ry q ruwrytu systum motulo FC qnt lyst txu ruwrytu sys-
tums ynvustywqtut yn txys pqpur. Yn custyon C wu u“plqyn txu wunurqlyzqtyon ov
]sAllustur7s proov tusxnyquu. gu qpply txys tusxnyquu yn custyons D, E qnt F
to ortqyn tusytqrylyty qnt somplu“yty rusults vor txu sqsu ov exhqzxnve tw plus
xomomorpxysm. gu tyssuss yn custyon G xow txusu rusults sqn ru trqnsvurut to
somu otxur rulqtut ruwrytu systums. Vynqlly, wu sonslutu yn custyon H.
dxu vull vursyon ov txys pqpur wytx qll proovs sqn ru vount qt kACm. gu usu
stqntqrt notqtyon vrom ruwrytynw. dxu ruqtur mqy sonsult kI, Cm yv nusussqry.
2 4 7blei-LTb Mbdel Ybe Eeweigiag Mbdhlb AC
gu sonsytur txu slqssys motul ov tutustyon rulus kA0m yntrotusut ry Toluv qnt
iqo yn ortur to motul txu tutustyvu sqpqsytyus ov q pqssyvu yntrutur. gu prusunt
xuru qn u“tunsyon ov txys motul wxuru wu qssumu qn qssosyqtyvu qnt sommutqtyvu
opurqtor ⊗, qnt qn uquqtyonql txuory E wxysx sqn ru u“ploytut ry txu yntrutur
to mount qn qttqsk. [nowlutwu ov txu yntrutur ys ruprusuntut ry turms ruylt ovur
q ,nytu sywnqturu  ov txu vorm
 : {〈·U ·〉U {·}·U⊗U f} ]0
wxuru 0 ys q sut ov sonstqnt symrols. dxu turm 〈uU v〉 ruprusunts txu pqyr ov
txu two turms u qnt v, qnt {u}v ruprusunts txu unsryptyon ov txu turm u ry txu
turm v. Vor txu sqku ov symplysyty wu xuru only sonsytur symmutrys unsryptyonK
txu rusults qnt tusxnyquus sqn ru uqsyly trqnsvurrut to txu sqsu ov qsymmutrys
unsryptyon.
dxu uquqtyonql txuory E ys ruprusuntut ry q sonvurwunt ruwrytu systum R
motulo FC, txqt ys R ys turmynqtynw qnt son-uunt motulo qssosyqtyvyty qnt
sommutqtyvyty ov ⊗, qnt vor qll turms tU s ∈ n () wu xqvu txqt t :E s y
t ↓R=AC :AC s ↓R=AC .
dxu tutustyon systum tussryrynw txu tutustyvu sqpqsytyus ov qn yntrutur ys
wyvun yn Vywuru A. dxys tutustyon systum ys somposut ov txu vollowynw rulusJ 8A9
txu yntrutur mqy usu qny turm wxysx ys yn xys ynytyql knowlutwu, 8P9 txu yntrutur
sqn ruylt q pqyr ov two mussqwus, 8eL, eb9 xu sqn u“trqst uqsx mumrur ov q
pqyr, 8S9 xu sqn unsrypt q mussqwu u wytx q kuy v, 8T9 yv xu knows q kuy v xu
sqn tusrypt q mussqwu unsryptut ry txu sqmu kuy, 8V9 xu sqn sonstrust q nuw
turm usynw txu vunstyon symrol f . cynsu wu tystynwuysx q spusyql rynqry opurqtor
⊗ wu xuru vurtxurmoru qtt q vqmyly ov rulus 8Wh9 wxysx qllows txu yntrutur to
ruylt q nuw turm vrom qn qrrytrqry numrur ov qlruqty known turms ry usynw
txu 8qssosyqtyvu9 ⊗ opurqtor. dxu nuut vor susx q vqryqtys rulu 8ynstuqt ov zust
q rynqry rulu9 wyll rusomu qppqrunt yn custyon C.
Yn vqst, txys tutustyvu systum ys uquyvqlunt yn tutustyvu powur to q vqryqnt
ov txu systum yn wxysx turms qru not qutomqtysqlly normqlyzut, rut yn wxysx
qrrytrqry uquqtyonql proovs qru qllowut qt qny momunt ov txu tutustyon. dxu
3L4 u ∈ T
T ` u ↓R=AC
3UW4 T ` r
T ` u ↓R=AC
if〈u; v〉 = r ↓R=AC
3[4 T ` u T ` v
T ` 〈u; v〉 ↓R=AC
3U]4 T ` r
T ` v ↓R=AC
if〈u; v〉 = r ↓R=AC
3N4 T ` u T ` v
T ` {u}v ↓R=AC
3O4 T ` r T ` v
T ` u ↓R=AC
if{u}v = r ↓R=AC
3F4 T ` u
T ` f(u) ↓R=AC
3Rc4 T ` u1 · · · T ` un
T ` (u1 ⊗ : : : ⊗ un) ↓R=AC
Fig. 1. L Ozwpv8dlz przzq systpx wzrvtyr zy yzrxlw qzrxs my l rpwrttp systpx R
xzouwz LN
f(x ⊗ y) → f(x) ⊗ f(y)
3l4 LNs
( ⊗ x → x
x ⊗ x → (
f(() → (
f(x ⊗ y) → f(x) ⊗ f(y)
3m4 LNUNs
(⊗ x → x
x ⊗ x → (
I(() → (
I(x ⊗ y) → I(x) ⊗ I(y)
I(I(x)) → x
f(I(x)) → I(f(x))
f(() → (
f(x ⊗ y) → f(x) ⊗ f(y)
3n4 LRs
Fig. 2. Tsp tsrpp rpwrttp systpxs xzouwz LN
uquyvqlunsu ov txu two proov systums xqs ruun sxown yn kGm wytxout FC q“yomsK
yn kACm txys xqs ruun u“tuntut to txu sqsu ov q ruwrytu systum motulo FC.
Yn txu rust ov txu pqpur, wu wyll ynvustywqtu txu Toluv-iqo tutustyon systum
motulo txu ruwrytu systums prusuntut yn Vywuru B, wxysx sorruspont ruspustyvuly
to FC plus xomomorpxysm ov f ovur ⊗, txu txuory ov exhqzxnve tw plus xomo-
morpxysm ov f ovur ⊗, qnt txu txuory ov Arulyqn wroups plus xomomorpxysm ov
f ovur ⊗. gu wyll omyt txu yntu“ R=AC qnt wrytu → ynstuqt ov →R=AC .
3 LbVTligl Tad 6bmclexigl bY 7edhVgiba Cebblemf
Our stqrtynw poynt ys txu losqlyty tusxnyquu yntrotusut ry Tqvyt ]sAllustur kAEm.
Xu sonsyturs tutustyon systums wxysx qru ruprusuntut ry ,nytu suts ov Xorn
slqusus. Xu sxows txqt txuru u“ysts q polynomyql-tymu qlworytxm to tusytu txu
tutusyrylyty ov q turm w vrom q ,nytu sut ov turms n0 yv txu tutustyon systum
xqs txu so-sqllut losqlyty propurty. A tutustyon systum xqs txu qthfqnyy uwtuewyy
yv qny proov ov n0 ` w sqn ru trqnsvormut ynto q losql proov wxuru q qthfq uwttk
ys q proov wxuru qll txu notus qru syntqstys surturms ov n0 qnt w.
dxu ytuq ov xys proov ys qs vollowsJ Sxuskynw u“ystunsu ov q proov qmounts to
sxuskynw u“ystunsu ov q losql proov. Lut us sqll vor txu momunt q weqevfsy nsxyfshe
ov q tutustyon rulu qn ynstqnsu ov q rulu wxuru qll turms qru syntqstys surturms
ov n0 or w. Only txusu ruluvqnt ynstqnsus qru nuutut to sonstrust q losql proov.
gu sqy txqt w ys tse2xyeu ieizhngqe vrom somu sut n , yv wu sqn ortqyn w vrom
n wytx only onu qpplysqtyon ov q rulu ov txu proov systum. do sxusk txu u“ystunsu
ov q losql proov ov n0 ` w yt ys now su.syunt to sqturqtu n0 ry txu onu-stup
tutustyon rulqtyon, wxuru yn qttytyon yt ys su.syunt to zust sonsytur txu ruluvqnt
ynstqnsus ov txu tutustyon rulus.
dxys qpproqsx suurs vrom two mqyn rustrystyonsJ
 dxu tutustyon systum must ru ,nytu.
 dxu notyon ov losqlyty ys rustrystut to syntqstys surturms.
dxusu rustrystyons rqysu q suryous prorlum wxun wu wqnt to work motulo
AC. Yv wu usut only q rynqry rulu 8Wh9 wu woult xqvu to sonsytur qll possyrlu
surturms motulo FC. envortunqtuly, txuru ys yn wunurql qn u“ponuntyql numrur
ov surturms motulo FC ov q wyvun turm. dxu solutyon proposut yn kFm, qnt
wxysx wu qlso qtopt xuru, ys to usu txu rulu 8Wh9 wytx qn qrrytrqry numrur
ov xypotxusus. Yn txys wqy, wu sqn qvoyt txu u“ponuntyql numrur ov surturms.
Xowuvur, wu qru now stusk wytx qn yn,nytu numrur ov rulus. Vortunqtuly, wu sqn
styll ortqyn qn polynomyql qlworytxm ry ymplumuntynw yn q sluvur wqy txu tust
wxutxur q turm w ys onu-stup tutusyrlu vrom q sut n .
Opytttoy 19 Ley S ge f kzshynts wmnhm rfux f xey tk yewrx yt f xey tk yewrx3
F uwttk P tk n ` w nx S-losql nk fqq stiex fwe qfgeqei gy xtre n ` v1 wnym
v ∈ S(n ∪ {w})3 F uwttk xyxyer nx S-losql nk wmesevew ymewe nx f uwttk tk n ` w
ymes ymewe fqxt nx xtre S2qthfq uwttk tk n ` w3
Tsporpx 19 Ley S ge f kzshynts rfuunsl f xey tk yewrx yt f xey tk yewrx1 fsi
P f uwttk xyxyer3 Nk
 yme xey S(n ) hfs ge htsxywzhyei ns ynre K11
 P nx S2qthfq1
 tse2xyeu ieizhngnqnyy ns P nx iehnifgqe ns ynre K21
ymes uwtvfgnqnyy ns yme uwttk xyxyer P nx iehnifgqe ns ynre max(K1UK2)3
dxys txuorum wunurqlyzus ]sAllustur7s rusult rusqusu yn xys sqsu txu syzu ov
txu sut ov syntqstys surturms ov txu sut n ys polynomyql yn txu syzu ov n , qnt synsu
onu-stup tutusyrylyty ys tusytqrlu yn polynomyql tymu vor q ,nytu proov systum.
Xunsu, yn ]sAllustur7s sqsu, yt rumqynut only txu S-losqlyty to sxow.
4 CebbY TeTafYbemTgibaf
dxu vollowynw tu,nytyons qnt trqnsvormqtyons sqn ru qpplyut to txu sqsus FCm
qnt FCUSm. dxu sqsu ov FLm ruquyrus qn u“tunsyon rryu-y tyssussut yn cursus-
tyon G.B.
Opytttoy 29 Yme syzu ov q proov P nx yme szrgew tk stiex ns P 1 iestyei
gy |P |3 F uwttk P tk n ` u nx mynymql nk ymewe nx st uwttk P ′ tk n ` u xzhm ymfy
|P ′| < |P |3
Opytttoy 39 Ley P ge f uwttk tk n ` w1 P nx f
 symplu proov nk efhm stie n ` v thhzwx fy rtxy tshe ts efhm gwfshm3
 -qt proov nk ymewe nx st -LX. wzqe nrreinfyeqy fgtve fstymew -LX. wzqe1
 ⊗-lqzy proov nk P nx fy fsi ymewe nx st -LX. wzqe nrreinfyeqy fgtve fs -F.
wzqe ns P 1
 ⊗-uqwur proov nk P nx fy fsi nk ymewe nx fy rtxy tse -F. wzqe nrreinfyeqy
fgtve f -LX. wzqe ns P 3
cynsu two sussussyvu 8Wh9 rulus sqn ru murwut ynto q synwlu 8Wh9 rulu q
mynymql proov ys q -qt proov. Orvyously qny mynymql proov ys symplu. Yntuytyvuly,
yn q ⊗-lqzy proov txu 8Wh9 rulu ys qpplyut qs lqtu qs possyrlu, qnt yn q ⊗-uqwur
proov txu 8Wh9 rulu ys qpplyut qs uqrly qs possyrlu.
Lpxxl 19 Nk ymewe nx f uwttk tk n ` w ymes ymewe nx fqxt f ⊗2qfzy uwttk fsi f
⊗2eflew uwttk tk n ` w3
Uwttk3 cussussyvu 8Wh9 rulus sqn orvyously ru murwut. gu sqn ortqyn q ⊗-lqzy
proov ry qpplyynw txu vollowynw proov trqnsvormqtyon ruluJ
n ` x1 T T T n ` xT
8Wh9
n ` x1 ⊗ T T T⊗ xT
8V9
n ` f(x1)⊗ T T T⊗ f(xT)
:⇒
n ` x1
8V9
n ` f(x1)
T T T
n ` xT
8V9
n ` f(xT)
8Wh9
n ` f(x1)⊗ T T T⊗ f(xT)
gu ortqyn q ⊗-uqwur proov ry qpplyynw txu vollowynw proov trqnsvormqtyon,
wxuru txu rulus (ai) qru qll tyurunt vrom (F )J
n ` x1
8V9
n ` f(x1)
T T T
n ` xT
8V9
n ` f(xT)
n ` y1
8a19
n ` z1
T T T
n ` ym
8am9
n ` zm
8Wh9
n ` f(x1)⊗ T T T⊗ f(xT)⊗ z1 ⊗ T T T⊗ zm
⇓
n ` x1 T T T n ` xT
8Wh9
n ` x1 ⊗ T T T⊗ xT
8V9
n ` f(x1)⊗ T T T⊗ f(xT)
n ` y1
8a19
n ` z1
T T T
n ` ym
8am9
n ` zm
8Wh9
n ` f(x1)⊗ T T T⊗ f(xT)⊗ z1 ⊗ T T T⊗ zm
5 LbVTligl Ybe ghe Eeweige Slfgem ACUNh
Opytttoy 49 Ley u ge f yewr ns stwrfq ktwr1 u nx xuqtut wytx ⊗ nk u nx tk
yme ktwr u1 ⊗ T T T⊗ uT wnym n X 13 Tymewwnxe u nx sty mefiei wnym ⊗3
We iese yme kzshynts qtoms8u9 fx ktqqtwnsl :
 Nk u : u1 ⊗ T T T ⊗ uT1 wmewe efhm tk yme ui nx sty mefiei wnym ⊗1 ymes
fytrx(u) : {u1U T T T U uT}3 Yme yewrx ui fwe hfqqei yme qtoms tk u3
 Nk u nx sty mefiei wnym ⊗1 ymes fytrx(u) : {u}3
dxu tu,nytyon ov qtoms(n ) wunurqlyzus yn q nqturql wqy to suts ov turms n yn
normql vorm ry qtoms(n ) ::
S
t∈T qtoms(t).
Opytttoy 59 We iese ktw fsy n ⊆ n () yme xey ST (n ) fx yme xrfqqexy xey
wmnhm htsyfnsx n 1 nx hqtxei zsiew xysyfhynh xzgyewrx1 fsi xzhm ymfy nk f(u1) ⊗
T T T⊗ f(uT) ∈ ST (n ) ymes u1 ⊗ T T T⊗ uT ∈ ST (n )3
Lpxxl 29 Ley P ge f uwttk wmnhm nx rnsnrfq frtsl fqq ⊗2qfzy uwttkx tk n ` w1
fsi xzhm ymfy yme qfxy wzqe fuuqnei ns P nx tk yme ktwr (r) T`N1:::T`NnT`w 1 wmewe
-X. nx tse tk -UL.1 -UW.1 tw -I.3 Ymes hi ∈ ST (n ) ktw fqq i3
dxys xqs ruun sxown kGm yn txu suttynw ov exhqzxnve tw wytxout qn xomomorpxysm.
dxu proov ys vury uqsyly u“tuntut 8suu kACm9 to our suttynw ov FCUSm.
Lpxxl 39 Ley P ge f uwttk wmnhm nx rnsnrfq frtsl fqq ⊗2qfzy uwttkx tk n ` w1
fsi qey P ′ ge f xzguwttk tk P wnym wtty qfgeq n ` h 3 Nk yme qfxy wzqe fuuqnei ns
P ′ nx -U.1 -C.1 tw -LX. ymes h ∈ ST (n ∪ {w})3
dxys ys q suntrql tusxnysql lummq. dxu proov ys wyvun yn kACm.
Lpxxl 49 Ley P ge f uwttk wmnhm nx rnsnrfq frtsl fqq ⊗2qfzy uwttkx tk n ` w1
fsi qey P ′ ge f xzguwttk tk P wnym wtty qfgeq n ` h xzhm ymfy yme qfxy wzqe fuuqnei
ns P ′ nx -F.3 Nk enymew
63 fqq stiex kwtr yme wtty tk P ′ yt yme wtty tk P fwe -F.1
23 tw nk yme wxy xzhhexxtw sty qfgeqei gy -F. tk yme wtty tk P ′ ns P nx qfgeqei gy
f wzqe inewesy kwtr -LX.1
ymes h ∈ ST (n ∪ {w})3
dxu two sqsus ov txu lummq sqn ru yllustrqtut lyku txysJ
P’ P
(F)
P’ P
(X)
(F)
Yn txu rywxt pysturu, 8h9 tunotus q rulu tyurunt vrom 8V9 qnt vrom 8Wh9. dxu
lummq stqtus txqt 8V9 notus qru yn ST (n ∪ {w}) qs lonw qs txuy to not protusu
qn xypotxusys ov q 8Wh9 rulu vyq q sussuutynw suquunsu ov 8V9 notus. dxys vollows
uqsyly vrom Lummq B qnt Lummq C 8suu kACm9.
Pxlxpwp 1 Yme ktqqtwnsl uwttk tk n : {u⊗ vU f(v)} ` f(u) nx rnsnrfq:
u⊗ v ∈ n
-F.
n ` u⊗ v
-F.
n ` f(u)⊗ f(v)
f(v) ∈ n
-F.
n ` f(v)
-LX.
n ` f(u)
We tgyfns ST (n ∪ {w}) : {uU vU u ⊗ vU f(u)U f(v)}3 Ymnx uwttk nx sty ST 2qthfq
xnshe f(u)⊗ f(v) 6∈ ST (n ∪ {w})3
As sqn ru suun yn txu qrovu u“qmplu, txu prorlum yn tu,nynw S-losqlyty vor q
polynomyql-syzu S ys to rount txu numrur ov qpplysqtyons ov txu 8V9 proov rulu
wxun sonstrustynw xypotxusus to q 8Wh9 rulu.
591 Lonlwtty ty tsp Btylry Clsp
Yn txu gnsfwy sqsu, txqt ys wxun qll turms yn ST (n∪{w}) xqvu qt most two qtoms,
wu sqn qstuqlly ,nt qn uppur rount vor txu numrur ov qpplysqtyons ov 8V9.
Opytttoy A9 F yewr t nx rynqry nk evewy s ∈ ST (t) enymew nx sty mefiei wnym
⊗1 tw nx tk yme ktwr s1 ⊗ s2 wmewe s1U s2 fwe sty mefiei wnym ⊗3 F xey tk yewrx
nx gnsfwy nk efhm tk nyx eqeresyx nx gnsfwy3 F uwttk nx gnsfwy nk efhm tk nyx stiex
nx qfgeqei gy f xevzesy n ` w wmewe n fsi w fwe gnsfwy3
Propostttoy 19 Nk n fsi w fwe gnsfwy ymes evewy uwttk wmnhm nx rnsnrfq frtsl
yme ⊗2qfzy uwttkx tk n ` w nx gnsfwy3
gu tu,nu vor qny turm t txu turm Xywnuf (f(t)) : Xywnuf (t), qnt Xywnuf (t) : t yv t
tous not xqvu root symrol f . Vurtxurmoru, #f (f(t)) : 1 ( #f (t), qnt #f (t) :
0 wxun t ys not xuqtut ry f . Yn txu rynqry sqsu wu qssosyqtu q onu-sountur
qutomqton to txu sut ST (n ∪{w}). dxu ytuq ys txqt stqtus ov txu qutomqton qru
turms yn Xywnuf (qtoms(ST (n ∪{w}))), qnt txu sountur ruprusunts txu numrur ov
qpplysqtyons ov f to q turm.
Opytttoy B9 Ley n ge f xey tk yewrx xzhm ymfy evewy yewr ns n mfx fy rtxy
ywt fytrx3 We ufwynynts n : n1]n2 wmewe n1 nx yme xey tk yewrx sty mefiei wnym
⊗1 fsi n2 nx yme xey tk yewrx mefiei wnym ⊗3 Yme qutomqton qssosyqtut wytx n 1
fggwevnfyei AT 1 nx f tse2htzsyew fzytrfyts wnymtzy nsuzy iesei fx ktqqtwx:
Yme xey tk xyfyex QT tk AT nx
{init} ∪ {p′ | p ∈ Xywnuf (n1)} ∪ {r | r ∈ Xywnuf (n1) ∪ Xywnuf (fytrx(n2))}
wmewe init nx yme nsnynfq xyfye tk AT 3 Yme xey tk ywfsxnyntsx nx:
Fwtr Yt Ctsinynts Fhynts
∀t ∈ n1 : init (Xywnuf (t))
′ c ≥ 0 c :: c
∀t ∈ n1 : (Xywnuf (t))
′ (Xywnuf (t))
′ c ≥ 0 c :: c ( 1
∀t ∈ n1 : (Xywnuf (t))
′ Xywnuf (t) c ≥ #f (t) c :: c
∀t⊗ s ∈ n2 : Xywnuf (t) Xywnuf (s) c ≥ #f (t) c :: c−#f (t) ( #f (s)
Notu txqt yn txu lqst lynu ov txu qrovu trqnsytyon tqrlu txu stqtumunt t⊗s ∈ n2
ys to ru unturstoot motulo FC, susx txqt wu ortqyn vrom q rynqry slqusu q rqsk
qnt q vortx trqnsytyon.
Pxlxpwp 2 Yme fzytrfyts AT ktw n : {a ⊗ f
2(b)U a} nx fx ktqqtwx1 wmewe c
iestyex yme nsnynfq xyfye:
N f, f g
c ≥ 0
c :: c
c ≥ 0
c :: c ( 1
c ≥ 0
c :: c
c ≥ 0
c :: c ( 2
c ≥ 2
c :: c− 2
Onu ov txu two lummqtq rulqtynw txu proov systum wytx our qutomqtq son-
strustyon ysJ
Lpxxl 59 Ley n ge f xey tk gnsfwy yewrx3 Ftw fqq t0U T T T U tT ∈ Xywnuf (fytrx(n ))
fsi fqq sfyzwfq szrgewx c0U T T T U cT we mfve ymfy
AT |: (t0U c0) → (t1U c1) → T T T → (tTU cT)
n ymewe fwe yewrx s1U T T T U sT ∈ n fsi sfyzwfq szrgewx d1U T T T U dT xzhm ymfy:
63 ktw 1 ≤ i ≤ n yme yewr si nx mefiei wnym ⊗ fsi mfx exfhyqy ywt fytrx1 ymfy
nx si : s
1
i ⊗ s
2
i
23 ∀1 ≤ i ≤ n : fdi(s1i ) : f
ci−1(ti−1)
33 ∀1 ≤ i ≤ n : fdi(s2i ) : f
ci(ti)
As q sonsuquunsu qnt usynw txu q“yom x⊗ x : 0, wu ortqyn txqt
TM
i=1
fdi(si) ↓ : f
d1(s1
1
)⊗ fdn(s2T) : f
c0(t0)⊗ f
cn(tT)
Lpxxl A9 Ley A ge f tse2htzsyew fzytrfyts fsi  : (qU cq) →
? (rU cr) f ufym
geywees yme xyfye q wnym yme htzsyew cq ≥ 0 fsi yme xyfye r wnym yme htzsyew
cr ≥ 03 Ymes ymewe exnxyx f ufym kwtr (qU cq) yt (rU cr) xzhm ymfy evewywmewe fqtsl
yme ufym yme vfqze tk yme htzsyew nx gtzsiei gy p(|A|)1 wmewe p nx f utqystrnfq
kzshynts3
gu rulyuvu txys lummq to ru volkloru rut wuru unqrlu to ,nt q proov yn txu lytur-
qturu. A proov, qlonw wytx q tu,nytyon ov txu polynomyql vunstyon p, ys ynslutut
yn txu somplutu vursyon kACm. gu sqn now tu,nuJ
Opytttoy C9 We iese ktw fsy snye xzgxey U tk n ():
Sf (U) : {f
i(u) ↓ | u ∈ ST (U)U 0 ≤ i ≤ p(|AT |)}
wmewe yme kzshynts p nx fx ns Lerrf 63
Notu txqt txu syzu ov Sf (U) ys polynomyql yn txu syzu ov U . Somrynynw Lummqtq B
txrouwx F wu ortqynJ
Lpxxl B9 Ley n ⊆ n () fsi w ∈ n () ge gnsfwy1 fsi qey P ge f uwttk wmnhm
nx rnsnrfq frtsl fqq ⊗2qfzy uwttkx tk n ` w3 Fqq stiex tk P fwe ns Sf (n ∪{w})3
592 Lonlwtty ty tsp Rpyprlw Clsp
Opytttoy D9 We iese ktw fsy snye xzgxey U tk n ():
S⊗(U) : {u1 ⊗ T T T⊗ uT|u1U T T T U uT ∈ ST (U)}
Notu txqt txu syzu ov S⊗(n ) ys u“ponuntyql yn txu syzu ov n .
Lpxxl C9 Ley M ⊆ n ()1 t0 ∈ n ()1 fsi t1U T T T U tT ∈ ST (M)3
Nk (t0 ⊗ t1 ⊗ T T T⊗ tT) ↓ ∈ S⊗(M) ymes t0 ∈ S⊗(M)3
dxu uqsy proov sqn ru vount yn kACm. dxys lummq, towutxur wytx txu pruvyous
lummqtq, ys txu kuy vor provynw txu vollowynw lummq wxysx stqtus txqt qny proov
wxysx ys mynymql qmonw txu ⊗-uqwur proovs ov n ` w sontqyns only notus yn
S⊗(n ∪ {w}).
Lpxxl D9 Yme Itqev2Yft uwttk xyxyer ns hfxe tk FCUSm nx S⊗2qthfq3
6 Oae-Sgec 7edhVibiligl ia 6Tfe bY ACUNh
gu vollow txu wull-known mutxot vor solvynw uny,sqtyon prorlums motulo FC -
lyku txuoryus kAFm. gu only sxow xow to tusytu onu-stup tutusyrylyty vor txu vqmyly
ov rulus 8Wh9, synsu sxuskynw onu-stup tutusyrylyty vor txu rumqynynw tutustyon
rulus ys strqywxtvorwqrt. gu trqnsvorm txu prorlum ov tustynw onu-stup tutusyryl-
yty ynto txu sqtys,qrylyty ov q systum ov lynuqr Tyopxqntynu uquqtyons.
Lut t ∈ n () qnt u ∈ n () not xuqtut wytx ⊗. gu tunotu ry (uU t) txu
numrur ov ossurrunsus ov u yn qtoms(t) 8wxysx ys, yn txu sqsu FCUSm, uytxur 0
or 19.
Opytttoy 109 Ley s ∈ n () fsi n : {t1U T T T U tT} ge f snye xzgxey tk n ()3
Ley fytrx(n ∪ {s}) : {a1U T T T U am}3 Yme evzfynts xyxyer D(nU s) tvew yme vfwn2
fgqex x1U T T T U xT nx
D(nU s) ::
m^
i=1
TX
j=1
(aiU tj) ∗ xj : (aiU s)
Pxlxpwp 3 Ley n : {a1 ⊗ a2 ⊗ a3U a1 ⊗ a4U a2 ⊗ a4} fsi s : a1 ⊗ a21 wmewe fqq
yme ai fwe sty mefiei wnym ⊗3 We nsywtizhe szrewnhfq vfwnfgqex x1U x2U x31 ymfy
nx tse szrewnhfq vfwnfgqe ktw efhm eqeresy tk n :
x1 ktw a1 ⊗ a2 ⊗ a3
x2 ktw a1 ⊗ a4
x3 ktw a2 ⊗ a4
Ftw evewy fytr ai we hwefye fs evzfynts3 Ymnx yneqix yme ktqqtwnsl evzfynts
xyxyer: 8>><
>>:
a1 : x1 ( x2 : 1
a2 : x1 ( x3 : 1
a3 : x1 : 0
a4 : x2 ( x3 : 0
Lpxxl 109 Ley s ∈ n () fsi n f snye xzgxey tk n ()3 Ymes s nx ieizhngqe
wnym tse fuuqnhfynts tk f wzqe -LX. kwtr n nk fsi tsqy nk D(nU s) nx xtqvfgqe tvew
Z=2Z3
cynsu sqtys,qrylyty ov q systum ov lynuqr Tyopxqntynu uquqtyons ovur Z=2Z ys
yn PdY]U kABm, wu ortqyn vrom Lummq A0, dxuorum A, qnt Lummq I txqtJ
Tsporpx 29 Yme vzexynts wmeymew n ` w nx ieizhngqe ktwr n ns hfxe tk yme
wewwnye xyxyer FCUSm nx iehnifgqe ns EXUYNRE3
Yn txu rynqry sqsu wu ortqyn vrom Lummq A0, dxuorum A, Lummq G, qnt Propo-
sytyon A txqtJ
Tsporpx 39 Yme vzexynts wmeymew n ` w nx ieizhngqe ktwr n ns hfxe tk yme
wewwnye xyxyer FCUSm1 wmewe n fsi w fwe gnsfwy1 nx iehnifgqe ns UYNRE3
7 ITeiTagf Tad 8xgeafibaf
B91 Tsp Rpwrttp Systpx ACG
dxu sqsu ov txu ruwrytu systum FCm ys musx symplur txqn txu sqsu FCUSm
synsu wytx FCm yt ys not possyrlu txqt turms qru sqnsulut out wxun qpplyynw txu
sonstrustor ⊗. Xunsu wu to not wut txu ty.sulty suun yn U“qmplu A.
Lpxxl 119 Yme exyesiei Itqev2Yft uwttk xyxyer ns hfxe tk FCm nx ST 2qthfq3
dxu townsytu ys txqt, yn ortur to tusytu onu-stup tutusyrylyty, wu now xqvu to
solvu lynuqr Tyopxqntynu uquqtyon systums ovur N. dxys prorlum ys yn wunurql
NP-somplutu kAGm. Vurtxurmoru, yt ys quytu uqsy to rutusu sqtys,qrylyty ov lynuqr
Tyopxqntynu uquqtyons ovur N to txu yntrutur tutustyon prorlum motulo FCm.
An u“suptyon ys qwqyn txu rynqry sqsu, wxuru onu-stup tutusyrylyty ys tusytqrlu
yn polynomyql tymu 8wxysx ys tryvyql to provu yn txys sqsu9. gu xunsu ortqynJ
Tsporpx 49 Yme uwtgqer wmeymew n ` w ns hfxe tk yme wewwnye xyxyer FCm nx
SU2htruqeye1 fsi iehnifgqe ns UYNRE nk we wexywnhy yme uwtgqer yt yme gnsfwy
hfxe3
B92 Tsp Rpwrttp Systpx AGG
dxu sqsu ov txu ruwrytu systum FLm ys vury symylqr to txu sqsu ov FCUSm. dxu
lummqtq qnt tusxnyquus sqn ru qtqptut uqsyly wxun wu sxqnwu txu tu,nytyons
ov ST , Sf , qnt S⊗ qnt ruquyru now yn qttytyon txqt txuy qru slosut untur qpply-
sqtyon ov txu ynvursyon vunstyon qnt sursuquunt normqlyzqtyon ov txu turm.
gu sqn tust onu-stup tutusyrylyty ussuntyqlly qs yn custyon F. dxu mqzor tyur-
unsu ys txqt wu now xqvu to sxusk our uquqtyon systum D(nU s) vor sqtys,qrylyty
yn Z, wxysx qwqyn ys yn PdY]U kAHm.
Tsporpx 59 Yme uwtgqer wmeymew n ` w ns hfxe tk yme wewwnye xyxyer FLm nx
iehnifgqe ns EXUYNRE1 fsi iehnifgqe ns UYNRE nk we wexywnhy yme uwtgqer yt
yme gnsfwy hfxe3
B93 Pxtpystoy to ly Pynrypttoy Opprlttoy wstns ts Soxoxorpstn
ovpr 

dxys u“tunsyon sonsysts ov ruplqsynw, yn txu txruu ruwrytu systums wyvun qt txu
unt ov custyon B, txu ruwrytu rulu
f(x⊗ y) → f(x)⊗ f(y)
ry txu nuw rulu
{x⊗ y}z → {x}z ⊗ {y}z
On q tusxnysql luvul, txys yntrotusus txu qttytyonql ty.sulty txqt wu sqn now
tusomposu yn surtqyn sqsus q sum ruylt ry ⊗, qs vor ynstqnsu
T ` {a}k ⊗ {b}k ⊗ {I}k T ` k
3O4
T ` a ⊗ b ⊗ I
Xowuvur, wu ortqyn vor txys u“tunsyon lummqtq qnt rusults wxysx qru qnqlowous
to txu onus yn txu pruvyous sustyons. dxu sonstrustyon ov txu qutomqton vor txu
rynqry sqsu u“plqynut yn custyon E xqs now to ru wunurqlyzut synsu wu now xqvu
qn q pryory yn,nytu vqmyly ov xomomorpxysms. Yn txu sqsu ov custyon E onu sountur
wqs unouwx to sount txu numrur ov qpplysqtyons ov txu xomomorpxys vunstyon f .
Yn txu u“tuntut sqsu, wu xqvu to ruprusunt txu suquunsu ov unsryptyon kuys usut
yn q stqsk ov unsryptyon opurqtyons, wxysx sqn now ru tonu wytx q pusxtown
qutomqton. gu sqn ,nt q lummq qnqlowous to Lummq F qlso vor txu slqss ov
pusxtown qutomqtq. dxu only rumqynynw ty.sulty ys to sxow txqt txu stqsk
qlpxqrut, wxysx sonsysts ov txu unsryptyon kuys usut yn q mynymql qnt ⊗-lqzy
proov, ys ,nytu. dxys ys not orvyous synsu wu mqy usu qny turm qs qn unsryptyon
kuy. Xowuvur, wu ortqyn uqsyly ry txu Lummqtq wxysx sorruspont to Lummqtq B,
C, qnt D txqtJ
Lpxxl 129 Ley P ge f uwttk wmnhm nx rnsnrfq frtsl yme ⊗2qfzy uwttkx tk
n ` w3 Fqq yme eshwyuynts peyx zxei ns yme uwttk P fwe ns ST (n ∪ {w})3
As q sonsuquunsu, txu dxuorums B, C, D, qnt E styll xolt vor txys u“tunsyon.
8 6baVlhfiba
A summqry ov txu rusults ortqynut on txu somplu“yty ov txu yntrutur tutustyon
prorlum motulo FC -lyku uquqtyonql txuoryus wytx xomomorpxysm ys wyvun yn txu
vollowynw tqrlu. dxu rusults vor xomomorpxysm only 8wytxout FC q“yoms9 xqvu
ruun sxown yn q tyurunt pqpur kGm qnt qru xuru sytut only vor somplutunuss.
Ctruqexnyy tk yme nsywziew ieizhynts uwtgqer
Rynqry sqsu Wunurql sqsu
h UYNRE kGm
FCm UYNRE SU -Somplutu
FCUSm UYNRE EXUYNRE
FLm UYNRE EXUYNRE
dxu ruqson vor txu xywx somplu“yty yn txu wunurql sqsu ys q tyurunt onu vor
txu tyurunt uquqtyonql txuoryus sonsyturut, qs sxown yn txu vollowynw tqrluJ
Ctruqexnyy ns yme lesewfq hfxe
Somputqtyon ov surturms Onu stup tutusyrylyty Wunurql tutusyrylyty
h UYNRE kGm UYNRE kGm UYNRE kGm
FCm UYNRE SU2Ctruqeye SU2Ctruqeye
FCUSm EXUYNRE UYNRE EXUYNRE
FLm EXUYNRE UYNRE EXUYNRE
As vuturu work, wu plqn to ynvustywqtu txu sqsu ov qn qstyvu yntrutur. gu
sqn yut orsurvu txqt yt xqs ruun sxown yn kHm txqt tusytqrylyty ov uny,sqtyon
motulo qn uquqtyonql txuory E ys q nusussqry sontytyon vor txu tusytqrylyty ov
txu susuryty ov q protosol vor q rountut numrur ov sussyons qnt yn prusunsu ov
txys uquqtyonql txuory E. cynsu uny,sqtyon motulo AC plus xomomorpxysm ys
known untusytqrlu kAFm, txu susuryty qwqynst qstyvu qttqskurs ys untusytqrlu qt
luqst vor txys uquqtyonql txuory qs wull.
Lnvyowwporxpyts gu qru wrqtuvul vor txu numurous usuvul rumqrks qnt xynts
wu ortqynut vrom our solluqwuus qt Lcf, yn pqrtysulqr 8yn qlpxqrutys ortur9
]qtxyuu Rqutut, Xururt Somon-Luntx, ctépxqnyu Tulqunu, Juqn Wourqult-
Lqrrusq, Vlorunt Jqsquumqrt, Slqutynu Pysqronny, qnt Pxylyppu csxnourulun.
Pxylyppu provytut us wytx q ,rst proov ov Lummq F.
EeYeeeaVef
f1h X9 Lmlot lyo L9 O9 Rzrozy9 L nlwnuwus qzr nryptzrrlpstn prztznzwsE Tsp spt
nlwnuwus9 Tyforxlttoy lyo Noxputlttoy7 14C314E1B07 Uly9 1DDD9
f2h X9 Lmlot lyo [9 ]zrlwly9 ]pnzyntwtyr twz vtpws zq nryptzrrlpsy 3tsp nzxputl8
ttzylw szuyoypss zq qzrxlw pynrypttzy49 Ty Pron. 1st TFTP Tytprylttoylw Noyfprpynp
oy Tsporpttnlw Noxputpr Sntpynp 3TFTPTNS47 vzwuxp 1CB2 zq LNNS7 plrps 3229
Sprtyrpr8aprwlr7 20009
f3h F9 Mllopr lyo T9 Ytpvzw9 Tprx Rpwrtttyr lyo Lww Tslt9 Nlxmrtorp Uytvprstty
[rpss7 1DDC9
f4h d9 Nspvlwtpr7 ]9 Vüstprs7 X9 ]ustyzwttns7 lyo X9 Turulyt9 Ly Y[ opntstzy prznp8
ourp qzr prztznzw tyspnurtty wtts cO]9 Ty Pron. of 1Cts Lyyulw TPPP Syxpostux
oy Lortn ty Noxputpr Sntpynp 3LTNS'0347 plrps 2A12B07 Ottlwl 3Nlylol47 20039
TPPP Nzxp9 Szn9 [rpss9
f5h U9 Nwlrv lyo U9 Ulnzm9 L survpy zq lutspyttnlttzy prztznzw wttprlturp9 hhhd.
//kkk.cg.mcf_.ac.i_/rjac/dadefg/dfafejiekdg.dg7 1DDB9
fAh S9 Nzxzy8Wuyos lyo a9 Ssxlttvzv9 Tytruopr opounttzys7 nzystrltyt szwvtyr lyo
tyspnurtty opntstzy ty prpspynp zq pxnwustvp zr9 Ty Pron. of 1Cts Lyyulw TPPP
Syxpostux oy Lortn ty Noxputpr Sntpynp 3LTNS'0347 plrps 2B12C07 Ottlwl
3Nlylol47 20039 TPPP Nzxp9 Szn9 [rpss9
fBh S9 Nzxzy8Wuyos lyo ]9 Trptypy9 Plsy tytruopr opounttzys9 Ty Y9 Oprsszwttz7
pottzr7 aprt’nlttoyE Tspory 1 Prlnttnp, Psslys Opotnltpo to eoslr Mlyyl oy tsp
Znnlstoy of Sts A4ts Mtrtsoly7 vzwuxp 2BB2 zq LNNS7 plrps 2252429 Sprtyrpr8
aprwlr7 20039
fCh a9 Nzrttpr7 S9 Opwluyp7 lyo [9 Wlqzurnlop9 L survpy zq lwrpmrltn przpprttps uspo
ty nryptzrrlpstn prztznzws9 ]psplrns ]ppzrt WSa8048157 WSa7 PYS op Nlnsly7
Sppt9 20049 Lvltwlmwp lt hhhd.//kkk.lgj.ebg-cachab.ff/PiVlig/RAPPORTSS
LSV/faddcfhg-meaf-2004-ligh.dhd9
fDh Y9 Oprsszwttz lyo U98[9 Uzulyyluo9 ]pwrttp systpxs9 Ty U9 vly Wppuwpy7 pot8
tzr7 Slyomoov of Tsporpttnlw Noxputpr Sntpynp7 vzwuxp M 8 Fzrxlw Xzopws lyo
Spxlyttns7 nslptpr A7 plrps 2433209 Pwspvtpr Sntpynp [umwtssprs lyo Tsp XTT
[rpss7 1DD09
f10h O9 Ozwpv lyo L9 dlz9 Oy tsp spnurtty zq pumwtn8vpy prztznzws9 Ty Trlyslnttoys oy
Tyforxlttoy Tspory7 vzwuxp 2D7 plrps 1DC20C9 TPPP Nzxp9 Szn9 [rpss7 1DC39
f11h F9 Ulnqupxlro9 Spnurtty prztznzws zppy rppzsttzry9 Lvltwlmwp lt hhhd.//kkk.
lgj.ebg-cachab.ff/gdcfe/ibdel.hhal9
f12h P9 Vlwtzqpy7 X9 S9 Vrtssylxzzrtsy7 lyo M9 O9 Sluyoprs9 Flst plrlwwpw nzxputlttzy
zq sprxttp lyo sxtts qzrxs zq pzwyyzxtlw xltrtnps9 STLM U. Lwrpmrltn Otsnrptp
Mptsoos7 C344EAC3AD07 1DCB9
f13h [9 Wlqzurnlop7 O9 Wurtpz7 lyo ]9 Trptypy9 Tytruopr opounttzy qzr aI8wtvp pqulttzylw
tspzrtps wtts szxzxzrpstsxs9 ]psplrns ]ppzrt WSa80481A7 WSa7 PYS op Nlnsly7
Yzv9 20049 Lvltwlmwp lt hhhd.//kkk.lgj.ebg-cachab.ff/PiVlig/RAPPORTSSLSV/
faddcfhg-meaf-2004-ligh.dhd9
f14h R9 Wzwp9 Ly lttlnv zy tsp Ypposlx8Snsrzpopr pumwtn vpy lutspyttnlttzy prztz8
nzw9 Tyforxlttoy Pronpsstyr Lpttprs7 5A334E1311337 1DD59
f15h O9 L9 XnLwwpstpr9 Lutzxlttn rpnzrytttzy zq trlntlmtwtty ty tyqprpynp rpwlttzys9
ULNM7 40324E2C43037 Lprtw 1DD39
f1Ah [9 Ylrpyorly9 Szwvtyr wtyplr pqulttzys zvpr pzwyyzxtlw spxtrtyrs9 Ty Pron. of
11ts Lyyulw Syxpostux oy Lortn ty Noxputpr Sntpynp 3LTNS47 plrps 4AA4B27
Uuwy 1DDA9
f1Bh N9 S9 [lplotxttrtzu9 Noxputlttoylw Noxpwpxtty9 Lootszy8bpswpy7 1DD49
f1Ch L9 Snsrtuvpr9 Tspory of Ltyplr lyo Tytprpr Prorrlxxtyr9 btwpy7 1DCA9
f1Dh X9 Turulyt9 [prszylw nzxxuytnlttzy7 20039
