Ordering-Based Strategies for Horn Clauses
Nachum Dershowitz
Department of Computer Science University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
1304 West Spring eld Avenue Urbana, IL 61801, U.S.A.
email: nachum@cs.uiuc.edu

Abstract
Two new theorem-proving procedures for equational Horn clauses are presented. The largest literal is selected for paramodulation in both strategies, except that one method treats positive literals as larger than negative ones and results in a unit strategy. Both use term orderings to restrict paramodulation to potentially maximal sides of equations and to increase the amount of allowable simpli cation demodulation. Completeness is shown using proof orderings.

1 Introduction

The completeness of positive-unit resolution for sets of

Horn clauses advantage of

apu1n^it

stra^tepgny

is thpant+t1hies

well-known. An number of literals

in clauses never grows; it su ers from the disadvantage of

being a bottom-up method. Ordered resolution, in which

the literals of each clause are arranged in a linear order

and only the largest literal may serve as a resolvent,

is also complete for Horn clauses Boyer, 1971 . The

purpose here is to design Horn clause strategies that

make more comprehensive use of orderings in controlling

inference.

A conditional equation is a universally-quanti ed Horn

clause in which the only predicate symbol is equality

'. Conditional equations are important for specifying

abstract data types and expressing logic programs with

eehhqnooulldda.stiIowsfnhn'se.=nWtev0ee,nrtwhareilntl0ettshh,ueemcheepqaaounsaciitnltaiigvouensteshuanientiit,tthhccaeelallfeueoqdsruem,acolseint1'yd^itst,iow'nis^lt,l

be called an unconditional equation. Horn clauses with

both equality and non-equality literals can be expressed

as conditional equations with equality literals only by

turning each nonequality atom l into a Boolean equation

l ' T , for the truth constant T . A conditional equation

eEeq1u^aftieo1n;^s: :er:ne;deuncges;s'hteontcipesr,ovpvarilnoidvgifnvogarlvEidailtiiydistoyf'ouftncciosonnvddaiilttiiidoonnfoaarll

ones.

This research supported in part by the National Science
Foundation under Grant CCR-9007195.

Positive-unit resolution, or any other complete variation of resolution, could be used to prove theorems in equational Horn theories the equality axioms, including functional re exivity, are Horn, but the cost of treating equality axioms like any other clause is prohibitive. For this reason, special inference mechanisms for equality, notably paramodulation Robinson and Wos, 1969 , have been devised. In the Horn case, a unit strategy can be combined with paramodulation Henschen and Wos, 1974; Furbach, 1987 .
In this paper, we describe two complete theoremproving methods for equational Horn theories. As in Hsiang and Rusinowitch, 1986; Kounalis and Rusinowitch, 1987; Zhang and Kapur, 1988; Rusinowitch, 1989; Bachmair and Ganzinger, 1990; Nieuwenhuis and Orejas, 1990 , our goal is to minimize the amount of paramodulation, while maximizing the amount of simpli cation| without threatening completeness. Orderings, described in detail in Section 2, are used to choose which literals participate in a paramodulation step, and which side of an equality literal to use. They utilize orderings of terms and atoms to restrict inferences, and are generalizations of ordered completion Bachmair et al., 1986; Hsiang and Rusinowitch, 1987 , an unfailing" extension of the completion procedure" in Knuth and Bendix, 1970 for unconditional equational inference. Completion operates on asymmetrical equations, that is, on rewrite rules, and has as its goal the production of con uent Church-Rosser systems of rules that can be used to decide validity. To achieve this, the larger sides of rules are overlapped on non-variable subterms of each other, producing equations that are called critical pairs". Brown 1975 and Lankford 1975 rst suggested combining completion for oriented unconditional equations, with paramodulation for unorientable ones and resolution for non-equality atoms. Paul 1986 studied the application of completion to sets of Horn clauses with equality.
Completion was extended to conditional equations by Kaplan 1987 , who turns equations into rules only if they satisfy a certain decreasingness" condition. The problem is that the critical pair of two decreasing rules can easily be nondecreasing. Like standard completion, both these methods may fail on account of inability to form new rules. Kounalis and Rusinowitch 1987 suggested narrowing conditions to achieve completeness.

Recently, several restrictions of paramodulation based on term orderings have been proposed for the full rst-order case, including Zhang and Kapur, 1988; Rusinowitch, 1989; Bachmair and Ganzinger, 1990 . For a survey of rewriting, see Dershowitz and Jouannaud, 1990 .
Section 3 presents a set of inference rules that severely restricts resolution with paramodulation by incorporating an ordering on atoms and terms. Limitinginference partially controls growth; keeping clauses fully simpli ed stunts growth even further. Such restrictions are of paramount importance in any practical theorem prover, but their refutational completeness has been di cult to establish. For our completeness proofs, sketched in Section 4, we adapt the proof-ordering method of Bachmair et al., 1986 to conditional proofs. Section 4.1 demonstrates the completeness of a unit strategy suggested in Dershowitz, 1990  and Section 4.2 considers a strategy based on conditional completion of decreasing rules. Proof orderings allow us to limit narrowing to negative literals in the unit strategy, something that appears impossible with the recent trans nite-tree proof method used in Hsiang and Rusinowitch, 1987 . The crux of our proof normalization argument is the observation that any conditional equational proof not in normal form" must either have a peak", that is, two applications of equations such that the middle term is the largest of all those involved and all subproofs are in normal form, or a drop", that is, an application of an equation or re exivity of equals to an instance of a condition in which all subproofs are in normal form. The strategies are designed to eliminate peaks and drops, thereby reducing the complexity assigned to the proof.
Section 5 concludes with a short discussion.

2 Simpli cation Orderings

Let T be a set of  rst-order terms, with variables taken

from a set X , and G be its subset of ground variable-

fstruhebeetteertrmemrmotsfw.titIrhfoiotttsiesdsuabattteeprrmmosititjnionTre,pl;baycbeytdjtbsywseo, smwigeentidefyermntohtsee.

Term orderings are of central importance in the

proposed methods. A total ordering on ground terms

G is called a complete simpli cation ordering Hsiang

and Rusinowitch, 1987 if it has a the replacement

property", subterm s

st located

implies at some

pthoasittioanny,teirsmgreuatser,

with under

bamlylutshstta,unbbatetnehrdaemtswebretmljl-touhroetdfertsi.wnuigbttSheusrtcemhheatpaDorcoegcprrusoehrrurotneywnd"ic-,tetze,tormf1s98roe7rtpdjle.arcifneoAdgr

completable simpli cation ordering on all terms T is a

partial ordering c that can be extended to a complete

simpli cation ordering on ground terms, such that d

s t implies that s t for all ground substitutions

. Furthermore, we will assume e that the constant T

is minimal in .

Imagine a total ordering of atoms and with no equa-

tions, per se. The method of Section 4.1, then, is just

selected positive-unit resolution, in which the largest

negative literal is chosen. The appropriate inference rule

would be expressed as:

E

q^s'T  q^s'T

 

u ' T;

l'T u ' T;



E l ' T;

q  u 'T

where is the most general uni er mgu of l and s.

Here, the positive unit clause l ' T is resolved with the

negative literal s ' T in the clause q ^ s ' T  u ' T ,

and produces a new Horn clause q  u ' T . The new

clause is a logical consequence of the two given clauses,

since s = l , where renames variables in l so that

it shares none with s. The clause would be generated

only when s q, by which we mean that s is the largest

negative literal in its clause.

A total simpli cation ordering on non-ground literals

is not actually possible which is why the ordering of the

parent clause is inherited in ordered resolution, but can

be approximated by a partial ordering. If only a partial

ordering is given, we resolve negative literals that are

potentially maximal. That is, we apply the above rule

if s 6 q , or, in other words, if the instance s of s

created by resolution is not necessarily smaller than the

other instantiated negative literals. Since some of the

rules we consider delete or simplify antecedent clauses,

the above format for inference rules, with the equations

that participated in the inference also appearing as part

of the consequent, is advantageous.

Suppose E is a set of Horn clauses in conditional

equation form. To handle equality literals l ' r, we

need to unify at subterms of conditions, not just at the

literal level. Note that whenever we refer to equations

in a set, we mean that it, or the symmetric equation

with l and r exchanged, or a variant with variables

renamed uniformly, actually appears in the set. With

that in mind, if l uni es with a non-variable subterm

scojndoiftioanaml aexqiumaatilonterqm^

s s

in
'

a t

condition  u ' v,

s' then

t a

of a new

Horn clause is created by applying the most general

unifying substitution to the conditional equation, and

then replacing l with r , as per the unit clause l ' r.

The conditions ensure that s is the potentially larger

side of the condition that is being paramodulated into

and that the replacement yields a potentially smaller

condition.

3 Inference Rules

We formulate our theorem-proving procedure as an infer-

ence system operating on a set of conditional equations,

and parameterized by a completable ordering . We

de ne a symmetric binary relation $, for a particular

set of conditional equations E, as the smallest relation

satisfying ufonr e'achvni,

tl


l

where

$'$rtisrintheEfroesruecaxhlilvteuh-t1artan'usiitivv1e$^clo svuir^e

of $. This relation corresponds to substitution of

equals" according to the axioms in E. We also de ne

a decreasing instance p

rewrite u '

relation v of a

!coEndoitniontearlmesquTat.ionAins

decreasing" if u v in the completable ordering and the proofs of the conditions only involve terms saiitnnmhtsepetaaarlsslrnaeetcmrcieatteilohonocaforndoneef.duri$itni.FogenoaWrnaedus,nwiiimtfr.iptueDeoqseu$uecadrtee!iaoosvnneincuvegos,nnienwd!sgsiitteiahiosinsdreaeselssjcuperrnseeetatcwitsaritinlhttlgyoee rules by the completion-like procedures of Kaplan, 1987; Ganzinger, 1987 . In these methods, superposition is used when the left-hand side is larger than the conditions; narrowing, when a condition dominates the left-hand side. As theorem provers, however, they are refutationally incomplete, since they make no provision for unorientable" equations s ' t such that s 6 t and t 6 s.
The inference rules we present may be classi ed into three expansion" rules and four contraction" rules. Contraction rules signi cantly reduce space requirements, but make proofs of completeness much more subtle.

Superpose:

E 

p  l ' r; qu'v p  l ' r;



E q  u ' v;

p ^ q  u r  ' v

if  uuj=6 62mpXgu;quj; v; l; u r 

Superposition i.e. oriented paramodulation of posi-

tive equational literals is performed only at non-variable

pinostihtiiosnrsuleu,jan62dXon.lyOinnlya

positive equations are used decreasing direction u 6

p; q. Either side of an equation may be used for

superposition, but only if, in the context of the paramod-

ulation, it is potentially the largest term involved u 6

vma;yuacrtually.

Note that the two conditional equations be the same except for renaming. Here

and later, when a rule refers to a clause of the form

q  u ' v, an unconditional equation u ' v is

also intended. When both participating equations are

unconditional, an unconditional ordered" critical pair

is generated.

We need, additionally, a rule that paramodulates into

maximal negative literals:

Narrow:

E 

p  l ' r; q^s't  u'v
p  l ' r;



E q ^ s ' t  u ' v;

p ^ q ^ s r  ' t  u ' v

if  ssj=6 62mpXgu;qsj; t;l; s r 

Whenever this or subsequent rules refer to a conditional equation like q ^ s ' t  u ' v, the intent is that s ' t is any one of the conditions and u is either side of the implied equation.

The last expansion rule in e ect resolves a maximal negative literal with re exivity of equals x ' x:

Re ect:

E f q^s't  u'v g

E

q ^ s ' t  u ' v; q  u 'v

if

= mgus; t s6 q

The contraction rules all simplify the set of conditional equations. The rst deletes trivial conditional equations:

Delete:

E f q  u'u g E

The next rule allows for deletion of conditions that are

trivially true:

Condense:

E f q^s's  u'v g E f q u v ' g

The last two contraction rules use decreasing instances to simplify other clauses. One rule simpli es conditions; the other applies to the equation part. In both cases, the original clause is replaced by a version that is logically equivalent, assuming the rest of E.

Simplify:

E f p  u'v g E f q u v ' g

Compose:

E f q  u'v g E f q  w'v g

if p !E q

if

u v

!pu_l'ru

w;
'

p v



l'r2 l ' r

E

By u ' v l ' r we mean that the larger of u and v, say u, is strictly greater than the larger side of l ' r, say l, in the encompassment ordering wherein a term is larger than its proper subterms and smaller than its proper instances, or that u = l but v is strictly greater than r under . This allows the larger side of an equation to be simpli ed by a more general equation, and the smaller side to be rewritten in any case.
We use the notation E ` E0 to denote one inference step, applying any of the seven rules to a set E of conditional equations to obtain a new set E0. The inference rules are evidently sound, in that the class of provable theorems is unchanged by an inference step.

4 Strategies

Let be any complete simpli cation ordering extending the given partial ordering . A proof of an equation s ' t between ground terms any variables in s and t may be treated as Skolem constants is a derivation"

s = t1

1 e!
11

t2

2 e!
22



m em!m

tm+1 = t

Pj1 Pj2

Pjm

of m + 1 terms m  0, which is either trivial tk+1

each step = tk, or

etlkse

$
is

jtuks+ti1

of ed

bptsukuylko,b;jypaairnksocguo'obafnsnsvdtkiiPutt;jniukoctnkoioanoonlfdfietttqhihkoueenfaoaatsrilpaoempvnqlaeiureeaidkaftobiironilmnnesstdaEionnf,ocnetroahteeekpahecoaqhksvu.ietaciSsotoutinnoebdpnpis,rtkoieaoomnnifndssas part of their justi cation. By the completeness of positive-unit resolution for Horn clauses, any equation s ' t that is valid for a set E of conditional equations is amenable to such an equational proof.
We use  for the inverse of !, and ! and  for the re exive-transitive closures of ! and , respectively. By a peak, we mean a proof segment of the form s  u ! t; by a valley, we mean a proof segment of the form u ! w  t; by a drop, we mean a step s ! t with valley subproofs; a plateau is a trivial subproof of form s $ s. The depth of a proof is the maximum nesting of subproofs; it is one more than the maximum depth of its subproofs.

4.1 Unit Stratgey

The inference rules of the previous section are designed

to allow any equational proof to be transformed into

normal form. A strategy based on these rules is complete

if we can show that, with enough inferences, any theorem

has a normal-form proof. For the unit strategy, a

normal-form proof is a valley proof of depth 0. That

is the same as saying that a normal-form proof has no

peaks, no drops, and no plateaus. Normal-form proofs

may be thought of as direct" proofs; in a refutational

framework the existence of such a proof for s ' t

means that demodulation of s and t using positive unit

equations su ces to derive a contradiction between the

Skolemized negation s0 6' t0 of the given theorem and

x ' x.

We must demonstrate that for any proof s $ t of

s't valley

pinroEof0

,

there s !

eventually w  t.

exists an In the

unconditional unit strategy,

only expansions involving an unconditional equation

are necessary. Speci cally, both equations used by

surauunseldpedser,rieniptoenwscaoetrueralvodrewenbteuiusnarceallolyanutdpnivirittoei.lvoyindWaeealeasraynenutidtoncntsohhoneotdwfpiototiroshincatoaitvnlentpraralorictortefiorowoanfl

s ' t, and that superpose eventually turns that into a

valley.

We call an inference fair" if all persistent superpo-

sitions of unit clauses, narrowings via unit clauses, and

re ections have been considered:

Unit
is fair

Strategy: An inference
with respect to the unit

ssterqauteengcyeifE0

`

E1

`







exp1E1  i0 Ei;

wpspweeehitrrtesshoriissefpttiicaEnnonggn1ddeciqqotiisunoeadmnttiahtipoileotnyensqs,aeunlbtaayetrlqiioromuonnawseitnitofawhjnpaEisptthljaimcnpa=dateyimoenbxpieptoy1i0f,noEsferu1jrprreeiedrEispefjrcotothsmo.eef

Theorem 1. If
fair for the unit

an inference sequence strategy, then for any

Epr0oo`f

Eof1

`
s'


t

is in

E0, there is a normal-form proof of s ' t in E1.

This is shown by trans nite induction on proofs. The term ordering is extended to the transitive closure of it and the proper subterm ordering. This in turn is extended to equations by considering the equation as a multiset of two terms, and using the multiset extension of this ordering. In the multiset ordering Dershowitz and Manna, 1979 , a multiset is decreased by replacing an element with any nite number of smaller elements. An equation is greater than a term if and only if one of its sides is. Conjunctions of equations are compared as multisets of these multisets, and a conjunction is larger than a term if one of its conjuncts is. Proofs are measured in the following way: Consider a step

s=wl



 e!

wr

=t

in a ground proof or its subproofs, where e is the conditional equation q  l ' r justifying the step, is the substitution, and s is the larger of s and t in the complete simpli cation ordering extending . To each such step, we assign the weight

qhf ; s; l g; ei

Steps are compared in the lexicographic ordering of these

pairs. The rst components of pairs are compared in the

multiset extension of the ordering on conjunctions and

terms described above. Note that s is always greater

or equal to l , and that for decreasing instances it is

also greater than q . Second components are compared

using the extension of the encompassment ordering

described earlier. Proofs are compared in the well-

founded multiset extension of the lexicographic ordering

on steps. We use to denote this proof ordering. It can

be shown by standard arguments see, e.g., Dershowitz

and Jouannaud, 1990  that is well-founded.

Note greater

that than

itfhse!coestt,otfhtehnetshteepcossitnoiftsthsiusbspteropoifss.alAwlasyos,

if s ! t ! u, then the cost of the rst step is larger than

that of the second.

We need to show that inferences never increase the

complexity of proofs and, furthermore, that there are

always inferences that can decrease the complexity of

non-normal proofs. Then, by induction with respect to

, the eventual existence of a normal-formproof follows.

Lemma 1. If E ` E0, then for any proof P in E of an
equation s ' t, there exists a proof P 0 in E0 of s ' t, such that P P 0 or P = P 0.

This is established by consideration of the e ects of

each contracting inference rule that deletes or replaces

equations, can take P

since 0=P

.foTrheexcpoanndsiitoinonrsuilmesp, oEsedonE0c,oamnpdowsee

are essential for showing a decrease in . A more

general contraction rule would simply allow deletion of

any equation that admits a smaller proof vis-a-vis .

Lemma 2.
there exists

If P is a proof

aPn0 oinn-nEormeaxl-pfo1rEmpsruoochf

in E, then that P

P 0.

The argument depends on a distinction between noncritical" subproofs, for which there is a proof P 0 in E

ietxseplf1,Ean darecnrieteicdaeld".

subproofs, A peak

for

which

equations

in

t0 p l 'r t !q u 'v t00

where t = w or below the

lposituion

,

is critical if the position  is at in w at which u ' v is applied,

but not at or below a position corresponding to any

variable in u, or symmetrically if falls within the

naofodnor-noveparoitafb!tlheqepasruetboptfr00otohisfes

occurrence of critical if the for q takes

l in w. Similarly, rst or last step place within the

non-variable part of the condition q.

Since any proof must have at least one subproof of

depth 0, any non-normal proof must have a plateau,

an unconditional peak, or a drop of depth 1 with

unconditional valley subproofs. Thus, we need not

worry about peaks involving a conditional rule, nor

drops in which the proof of some condition is not

unconditional. All plateaus can be spliced out. Criti-

cal unconditional peaks, critical drops with non-empty

unconditional valley subproofs, and drops with empty

proofs of conditions can each be replaced by a smaller

prerqouoifr,edusainpgplitchaetiocnonodfitsiuopnaelrpeqousaet,inonargreonwe,raotredrebyecat

inference, respectively. Narrowing can be restricted to

the maximal side of the maximal condition, since a drop

with non-empty subproofs must have a step emanating

from the larger side of its largest condition.

Non-critical unconditional peaks t0  t ! t00 have

alternative, smaller proofs t0 ! t  t00 in E by the

version of the Critical Pair Lemma in Lankford, 1975 .

Consider a non-critical drop with unconditional subproof

w p

u
!

p$q 0

!u

p'00v

w


v, p000,

where p is no smaller than any other term in the

subproof q . Suppose p has a variable x at position

 and the rst step applies within the variable part

pbje

. That is, p = p x the same substitution as



!excpeptrtha=t

p0. Let : x 7! r.

There is a smaller proof smaller, vis-a-vis  in E:

w u  rewrites x

wu !r

th$atq neeud'tvo

w v ! w v be added to turn

. Any a proof

of q into a proof of q are also smaller.

Theorem 1 follows: If then by Lemma 1 it has If P is non-normal, then

sabyp'roLoetfmPims aipnr2otvhaeitblliaemdimint iEtEs10a,.

smaller number of those

epoqrfoueoaqftuioPant0sioaunpssipniengareeixdnpa1atdEled1aitsito.onnBctyeo

fEai1rnesas, along the

nite each way.

Subsequent inferences by Lemma 1 can only decrease

the complexity of the proof of such an equation once it

aeapcpheaerqsuiantiaonsenteEediedanind

has a one-step P 0 has a proof

proof. Thus, of no greater

ncoamtuprleexoifttyheinprEoo1f

itself, and hence measure, there is

by the a proof of

multiset s ' t in

Eon1prtohoafts

is is

strictly smaller than P . Since the ordering well-founded, by induction there must be a

normal proof in E1.

4.2 Decreasing Strategy

In the above method, only unconditional equations are used for superposition and narrowing. An alternative is

to design an inference system that distinguishes between decreasing and nondecreasing non-unit clauses. We give here a method based on the incomplete completion
muestinhgodsuinpeGrpaonsziengaenrd, 1n9a8r7ro. wThaerereaqguairinedainstfreirnegnecnest
restriction of paramodulation. For the decreasing method, we rede ne a normal-form
proof of s ' t to be a valley proof in which each subproof is also in normal form and each term in a subproof is smaller than the larger of s and t; see Dershowitz and Okada, 1988 . Any non-normal-form proof has a peak made from decreasing instances with normal-form subproofs, or has a nondecreasing step with normalform subproofs, or has a trivial step. The Critical Pair Lemma of Kaplan, 1987 for decreasing systems can be adapted to ground con uence of decreasing systems. Superposition is needed between decreasing conditional rules. As before, we must perform enough expansions with persistent conditional equations for there to always be a normal-form proof in the limit.

Decreasing Strategy:
`    is fair with respect

An to

tihneferdeenccreeasseiqnugesntcreatEeg0y`ifE1

expE1  i0 Ei;

wthhaetremaeyxpbeEi1nferrisedthfreomsept erosfistcionngdietqiounaatilonesqubaytioonnes aopr prleicaetciotn. of an expansion rule superpose, narrow,

Theorem 2. If an inference sequence is fair for the

decreasing strategy, then for any proof of s ' t in the

ifnoritmialpsreotofEo0f

of s

conditional equations, ' t in the limit E1.

there

is

a

normal-

5 Discussion

We presented two complete theorem-proving strategies based on the use of term-orderings. Both strategies provide for simpli cation demodulation by what we called decreasing" equations.
Our unit strategy is the rst to combine a restriction to paramodulation with unit equations with a strategy based on maximal terms. It limited inferences in the following ways: 1 The functional re exive axioms are not needed and, at the same time, paramodulation into variables is avoided as for some versions of paramodulation; 2 for all resolution and paramodulation inferences, at least one of the equations must be unconditional as in positive unit resolution and positive unit paramodulation; 3 unless an equation is unconditional only its conditional part is used for paramodulation analogous to positive-unit resolution; 4 only maximal terms with respect to a given ordering are used analogous to ordered resolution. Unlike Kounalis and Rusinowitch, 1987 , we use only unit clauses when paramodulating into conditions; unlike Bachmair et al., 1989 , all inferences use only the maximal side of an equation.
The second strategy prefers paramodulation between positive literals. It requires less paramodulation and o ers more simpli cation than Kounalis and Rusinowitch, 1987 , for example. In essence, it treats decreasing

equations like unit clauses of the rst strategy. When the ordering supplied to the prover is empty the empty ordering is completable, the method reduces to special" paramodulation, in which the functionalre exive axioms are not needed and paramodulation into variables is not performed see Lankford, 1975 . The limitations on paramodulation are like those in Bertling, 1990 , but we give a speci c, practical strategy for simpli cation.
The strength of these methods, both in minimizing possible inferences and maximizing potential simpli cations, is brought to bear by employing more complete orderings than the empty one. A nonempty ordering eliminates many potential paramodulations and allows conditional equations that are simpli able to be replaced without compromising refutation completeness. In practice, any e ciently computable ordering should be better than uncontrolled paramodulation. The polynomial and path orderings commonly used in rewrite-based theorem provers Dershowitz, 1987 are completable. In particular, the recursive path orderings have decidability properties Jouannaud and Okada, 1991 that make it ideal for this purpose. Choosing an ordering that takes the goal theorem into account can impart a top-down avor to an otherwise bottom-up procedure.
We used the same ordering for simpli cation as for choosing the maximalliteral. In fact, a di erent selection strategy can be used for choosing the literal to narrow, as in Bertling and Ganzinger, 1989 , but then the term ordering must be used to choose the larger side of the equality.
References
Bachmair and Ganzinger, 1990 Leo Bachmair and Harald Ganzinger. Completion of rst-order clauses with equality. In M. Okada, editor, Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on Conditional and Typed Rewriting Systems Montreal, Canada, Berlin, June 1990.
Bachmair et al., 1986 Leo Bachmair, Nachum Dershowitz, and Jieh Hsiang. Orderings for equational proofs. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, pages 346 357, Cambridge, MA, June 1986.
Bachmair et al., 1989 Leo Bachmair, Nachum Dershowitz, and David A. Plaisted. Completion without failure. In H. A
t-Kaci and M. Nivat, editors, Resolution of Equations in Algebraic Structures, volume 2: Rewriting Techniques, chapter 1, pages 1 30. Academic Press, New York, 1989.
Bertling and Ganzinger, 1989 Hubert Bertling and Harald Ganzinger. Completion-time optimization of rewrite-time goal solving. In N. Dershowitz, editor, Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Rewriting Techniques and Applications Chapel Hill, NC, volume 355, pages 45 58, Berlin, April 1989.
Bertling, 1990 Hubert Bertling. Knuth-Bendix completion of Horn clause programs for restricted linear resolution and paramodulation. In S. Kaplan and

M. Okada, editors, Extended Abstracts of the Second International Workshop on Conditional and Typed Rewriting Systems, pages 89 95, Montreal, Canada, June 1990. Revised version to appear in Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer-Verlag, Berlin. Boyer, 1971 Robert S. Boyer. Locking: A restriction of resolution. PhD thesis, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, 1971. Brown, 1975 Thomas Carl Brown, Jr. A Structured Design-Method for Specialized Proof Procedures. PhD thesis, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, 1975. Dershowitz and Jouannaud, 1990 Nachum Dershowitz and Jean-Pierre Jouannaud. Rewrite systems. In J. van Leeuwen, editor, Handbook of Theoretical Computer Science, volume B: Formal Methods and Semantics, chapter 6, pages 243 320. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1990. Dershowitz and Manna, 1979 Nachum Dershowitz and Zohar Manna. Proving termination with multiset orderings. Communications of the ACM, 228:465 476, August 1979. Dershowitz and Okada, 1988 Nachum Dershowitz and Mitsuhiro Okada. Proof-theoretic techniques and the theory of rewriting. In Proceedings of the Third IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, pages 104 111, Edinburgh, Scotland, July 1988. Dershowitz, 1987 Nachum Dershowitz. Termination of rewriting. 31&2:69 115, February April 1987. Corrigendum: 4, 3 December 1987, 409 410; reprinted in Rewriting Techniques and Applications, J.-P. Jouannaud, ed., pp. 69|115, Academic Press, 1987. Dershowitz, 1990 Nachum Dershowitz. A maximalliteral unit strategy for Horn clauses. In S. Kaplan and M. Okada, editors, Extended Abstracts of the Second International Workshop on Conditional and Typed Rewriting Systems, pages 21 27, Montreal, Canada, June 1990. Concordia University. Revised version in Lecture Notes in Computer Science 516, SpringerVerlag, Berlin. Furbach, 1987 Ulrich Furbach. Oldy but goody: Paramodulation revisited. In Morik, editor, Proceedings of the GI Workshop on Arti cial Intelligence, pages 195 200, 1987. Vol. 152 of Informatik Fachberichte. Ganzinger, 1987 Harald Ganzinger. A completion procedure for conditional equations. In S. Kaplan and J.-P. Jouannaud, editors, Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Conditional Term Rewriting Systems, volume 308, pages 62 83, Orsay, France, July 1987. Henschen and Wos, 1974 L. Henschen and L. Wos. Unit refutations and Horn sets. J. of the Association for Computing Machinery, 21:590 605, 1974. Hsiang and Rusinowitch, 1986 Jieh Hsiang and Michael Rusinowitch. A new method for establishing refutational completeness in theorem

proving. In J. H. Siekmann, editor, Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Automated Deduction Oxford, England, volume 230, pages 141 152, Berlin, July 1986. Hsiang and Rusinowitch, 1987 Jieh Hsiang and Michael Rusinowitch. On word problems in equational theories. In T. Ottmann, editor, Proceedings of the Fourteenth EATCS International Conference on Automata, Languages and Programming Karlsruhe, West Germany, volume 267, pages 54 71, Berlin, July 1987. Jouannaud and Okada, 1991 JeanPierre Jouannaud and Mitsuhiro Okada. Satis ability of systems of ordinal notations with the subterm property is decidable. In J. Leach Albert, B. Monien, and M. Rodr
guez Artalejo, editors, Proceedings of the Eighteenth EATCS Colloquium on Automata, Languages and Programming Madrid, Spain, volume 510, pages 455 468, Berlin, July 1991. Kaplan, 1987 Stephane Kaplan. Simplifying conditional term rewriting systems: Uni cation, termination and con uence. 43:295 334, December 1987. Knuth and Bendix, 1970 Donald E. Knuth and P. B. Bendix. Simple word problems in universal algebras. In J. Leech, editor, Computational Problems in Abstract Algebra, pages 263 297. Pergamon Press, Oxford, U. K., 1970. Reprinted in Automation of Reasoning 2, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 342 376 1983. Kounalis and Rusinowitch, 1987 Emmanuel Kounalis and Michael Rusinowitch. On word problems in Horn theories. In S. Kaplan and J.-P. Jouannaud, editors, Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Conditional Term Rewriting Systems Orsay, France, volume 308, pages 144 160, Berlin, July 1987. Lankford, 1975 Dallas S. Lankford. Canonical inference. Memo ATP-32, Automatic Theorem Proving Project, University of Texas, Austin, TX, December 1975. Nieuwenhuis and Orejas, 1990 Robert Nieuwenhuis and Fernando Orejas. Clausal rewriting. In S. Kaplan and M. Okada, editors, Extended Abstracts of the Second International Workshop on Conditional and Typed Rewriting Systems, pages 81 88, Montreal, Canada, June 1990. Concordia University. Revised version to appear in Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer-Verlag, Berlin. Paul, 1986 Etienne Paul. On solving the equality problem in theories de ned by Horn clauses. Theoretical Computer Science, 442:127 153, 1986. Robinson and Wos, 1969 G. Robinson and L. Wos. Paramodulation and theorem-proving in rst order theories with equality. In B. Meltzer and D. Michie, editors, Machine Intelligence 4, pages 135 150. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh, Scotland, 1969. Rusinowitch, 1989 Michael Rusinowitch. Demonstration Automatique:

Techniques de reecriture. InterEditions, Paris, France, 1989. Zhang and Kapur, 1988 Hantao Zhang and Deepak Kapur. First-order theorem proving using conditional equations. In E. Lusk and R. Overbeek, editors, Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Automated Deduction Argonne, Illinois, volume 310, pages 1 20, Berlin, May 1988.

