Resource
Breakpoint graphs and ancestral genome
reconstructions
Max A. Alekseyev and Pavel A. Pevzner1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0404, USA
Recently completed whole-genome sequencing projects marked the transition from gene-based phylogenetic studies to
phylogenomics analysis of entire genomes. We developed an algorithm MGRA for reconstructing ancestral genomes and
used it to study the rearrangement history of seven mammalian genomes: human, chimpanzee, macaque, mouse, rat, dog,
and opossum. MGRA relies on the notion of the multiple breakpoint graphs to overcome some limitations of the existing
approaches to ancestral genome reconstructions. MGRA also generates the rearrangement-based characters guiding the
phylogenetic tree reconstruction when the phylogeny is unknown.
[Supplemental material is available online at www.genome.org.]
The first attempts to reconstruct the genomic architecture of an-
cestral mammals predated the era of genomic sequencing and
were based on cytogenetics approaches (Wienberg and Stanyon
1997). The rearrangement-based phylogenomic studies were pio-
neered by Sankoff and colleagues (Sankoff et al. 1992; Blanchette
et al. 1997; Sankoff and Blanchette 1998) and were based on an-
alyzing the breakpoint distances. Moret et al. (2001) further opti-
mized this approach and developed a popular GRAPPA software
for rearrangement analysis. MGR, another genome rearrangement
tool (Bourque and Pevzner 2002), uses genomic distances instead of
breakpoint distances for ancestral reconstructions. Since genomic
distances lead to more accurate ancestral reconstructions (Moret
et al. 2002; Tang and Moret 2003), GRAPPA has been modified for
genomic distances as well. While MGR has been used in several
phylogenomic studies (Bourque et al. 2005; Murphy et al. 2005;
Bulazel et al. 2007; Pontius et al. 2007; Xia et al. 2007; Cardone
et al. 2008; Deuve et al. 2008), both MGR and GRAPPA have
limited ability to distinguish reliable from unreliable rearrange-
ments and to address the ‘‘weak associations’’ problem in ancestral
reconstructions (Bourque et al. 2004, 2005, 2006; Froenicke et al.
2006).
Recently, Ma et al. (2006) made an important step toward
reliable reconstruction of the ancestral genomes. In contrast to
MGR and GRAPPA (which analyze both reliable and unreliable
rearrangements), they have chosen to focus on the reliable
breakpoint reconstruction in the ancestral genomes and to avoid
assignments in the case of weak associations (complex break-
points). This proved to be a valuable approach since, as it turned
out, most breakpoints in the ancestral mammalian genomes can
be reliably reconstructed. However, there are some limitations
(discussed in Rocchi et al. 2006) that this approach has to over-
come to scale for large sets of genomes. First, while the Ma et al.
(2006) inferCARs algorithm assumes that the phylogeny is known,
it remains a subject of enduring debates even in the case of the
primate–rodent–carnivore split (which is assumed to be resolved
in Ma et al. 2006). With the increase in the number of species, the
reliability of the phylogeny will become even a bigger concern,
thus raising the question of devising an approach that does not
assume a fixed phylogeny but instead uses rearrangements as new
characters for constructing phylogenetic trees (see Chaisson et al.
2006). While MGR does not assume a fixed phylogeny, its heu-
ristically derived weak associations are less reliable. The challenge
then is to integrate the reliability of inferCARs with the flexibility
of MGR. Another avenue to improve inferCARs algorithms is to
find out how to deal with complex breakpoints that create gaps in
reconstructions.
Note that the Ma et al. (2006) approach focuses on the reli-
able ancestor reconstruction rather than on the specific rear-
rangements that happened in the course of evolution. These are
related but different problems that both can benefit from in-
corporating into a single computational framework. Indeed, Ma
et al. (2006) consider individual breakpoints and do not distin-
guish between particular types of rearrangements that generated
a breakpoint of interest. In reality, the reversals and translocations
operate on pairs of dependent breakpoints rather than individual
breakpoints. Some rearrangements (and synteny associations)
cannot be inferred from the analysis of single breakpoints but
become tractable via analyzing the breakpoint graph.2 As a result,
while MGR constructs provably optimal scenarios in the absence
of breakpoint reuse, it is not clear whether the same result holds
for inferCARs.
Recently, Zhao and Bourque (2007, 2009) developed the
EMRAE algorithm, which reconstructs both reliable rearrange-
ments and ancestors, thus addressing the shortcomings of both
MGR (difficulty in distinguishing between reliable and putative
rearrangement events) and inferCARs (ancestor reconstruction
only). However, EMRAE (in contrast to MGR) does not attempt
to reconstruct the phylogenetic tree and is limited to uni-
chromosomal genomes. Below we address some limitations of
MGR, EMRAE, and inferCARs by developing theMultiple Genome
Rearrangements and Ancestors (MGRA) algorithm (available
from http://www.cs.ucsd.edu/users/ppevzner/software.html). In
particular: (1) MGRA constructs provably optimal scenarios
even when there is some breakpoint reuse and when other tools
do not guarantee optimality. (2) MGRA is suitable for ancestral
reconstructions of multi-chromosomal genomes (in contrast
to EMRAE). (3) MGRA is conceptually simpler and orders of
1Corresponding author.
E-mail ppevzner@cs.ucsd.edu; fax (858) 534-7029.
Article published online before print. Article and publication date are at
http://www.genome.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/gr.082784.108.
2 The breakpoint graphs represent a popular technique for the rearrangement
analysis since they reveal pairs of breakpoints representing footprints of the
rearrangement events. See chapter 10 of Pevzner (2000) for background
information on genome rearrangements and breakpoint graphs.
19:943–957  2009 by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; ISSN 1088-9051/09; www.genome.org Genome Research 943
www.genome.org
magnitude faster than MGR. (4) MGRA
is not limited to reconstructing ancestral
genomes in the case of known phylogeny
(like inferCARs and EMRAE). Instead,
it can guide the rearrangement-based
reconstruction of phylogenetic trees. (5)
MGRA does not require prior informa-
tion about the approximate lengths of
the branches of the phylogenetic trees (in
contrast to inferCARs).
To evaluate the performance of
MGRA, we compared ancestral recon-
structions generated by MGRA and
inferCARs. Despite the fact that MGRA
and inferCARs are very different algo-
rithms, their reconstructions turned out
to be remarkably similar (98.5% of syn-
teny associations are identical). We fur-
ther analyzed some differences between
MGRA, inferCARs, and the cytogenetics
approach.
Methods
From pairwise to multiple breakpoint graphs
We start with analysis of rearrangements in circular genomes
(i.e., genomes consisting of circular chromosomes) and later ex-
tend it to genomes with linear chromosomes. We assume that
each genome is formed by the same set of synteny blocks,
which are arranged differently in different genomes. We will find
it convenient to represent a chromosome formed by synteny
blocks b1, . . . , bn as a cycle with n directed labeled edges (corre-
sponding to blocks) alternating with n undirected unlabeled
edges (connecting adjacent blocks). The directions of the edges
correspond to signs (strand) of the blocks. We label the tail and
head of a directed edge bi as bi
t and bi
h, respectively (Fig. 1)
and represent a genome as a set of disjoint cycles (one for each
chromosome). The edges in each cycle alternate between two
colors: one color (e.g., ‘‘black’’) used for undirected edges and
the other color (traditionally called ‘‘obverse’’) used for directed
edges.
Let P be a genome represented as a collection of alternating
black-obverse cycles (a cycle is alternating if the colors of its edges
alternate). For any two black edges (x1, x2) and (y1, y2) in the ge-
nome (graph) P, we define a 2-break rearrangement (first intro-
duced as a DCJ rearrangement in Yancopoulos et al. 2005 and
recently studied in Bergeron et al. 2006 and Lin and Moret 2008)
as ‘‘replacement of these edges with either a pair of edges (x1, y1),
(x2, y2), or a pair of edges (x1, y2), (x2, y1)’’ (Fig. 2A,B). In the case of
circular genomes, 2-breaks correspond to the standard rearrange-
ment operations of reversals, fissions, or fusions/translocations
(Fig. 2).3
Let P and Q be genomes on the same set of blocks B. The
(pairwise) breakpoint graph G(P, Q) is simply the superposition of
genomes (graphs) P and Q (Fig. 1C). Formally, the breakpoint
graphG(P,Q) is defined on the set of verticesV = {bt, bh | b 2 B} with
edges of three colors: obverse (connecting vertices bt and bh), black
(connecting adjacent blocks in P), and green (connecting adjacent
blocks in Q). The black and green edges form the black–green al-
ternating cycles that play an important role in analyzing rear-
rangements (Bafna and Pevzner 1996). From now on we will
ignore the obverse edges in the breakpoint graph so that it
becomes simply a collection of (black–green) cycles (Fig. 1).
The 2-break distance d2(P, Q) between genomes P and Q is
defined as ‘‘the minimum number of 2-breaks required to trans-
form one genome into the other.’’ In contrast to the Genomic
Distance Problem (Hannenhalli and Pevzner 1995; Tesler 2002a;
Ozery-Flato and Shamir 2003) (for linear multi-chromosomal
genomes), the 2-Break Distance Problem for circular multi-
chromosomal genomes has a trivial solution (Yancopoulos et al.
2005; Alekseyev and Pevzner 2007): d2(P, Q) = b(P, Q)  c(P, Q),
where b(P, Q) = |B| is the number of synteny blocks in P and Q, and
c(P, Q) is the number of black–green cycles in G(P, Q).
A linear genome is a collection of linear chromosomes rep-
resented as sequences of signed synteny blocks. Each linear
chromosome on n blocks is represented as a path of n directed
obverse edges (encoding blocks and their direction) alternating
with (n  1) undirected black edges (connecting adjacent blocks).
In addition, we introduce an extra vertex ‘ and connect it by an
undirected (irregular) black edge with every vertex representing
a chromosomal end (hence, the degree of vertex ‘ is twice the
number of linear chromosomes). A ‘‘linear chromosome’’ is an
alternating path of black and obverse edges, starting and ending at
the vertex ‘, and a ‘‘linear genome’’ is a collection of such paths.
The 2-breaks involving irregular edges model the rearrangements
affecting the chromosome ends (Fig. 2C,D).
Analyzing reversals, translocations, fusions, and fissions in
linear genomes poses additional algorithmic challenges as com-
pared to analyzing 2-breaks in circular genomes. However, rear-
rangement scenarios in linear genomes are well approximated by
2-break scenarios in circular genomes (Alekseyev 2008). Hence, we
use 2-breaks as a single substitute for reversals, translocations,
fusions, and fissions, admitting that 2-breaks may violate linearity
of the genomes by creating circular chromosomes.
While previous rearrangement studies (e.g., MGR) were lim-
ited to analyzing the pairwise breakpoint graphs, MGRA uses
multiple breakpoint graphs (Caprara 1999b), which simplify the
rearrangement analysis. Let P1, . . . , Pk be genomes on the same set
of synteny blocks B. Similarly to the pairwise breakpoint graph,
the (multiple) breakpoint graph G(P1, . . . , Pk) is simply the su-
perposition of genomes (graphs) P1, . . . , Pk on the same vertex set
Figure 1. (A) Unichromosomal genome P = (+a +b c) represented as a black-obverse cycle. (B)
Unichromosomal genome Q = (+a b +c) represented as a green-obverse cycle. (C) The breakpoint
graph G(P, Q) with and without obverse edges.
3 In this study, we use the term ‘‘reversal’’ (common in bioinformatics liter-
ature) instead of the term ‘‘inversion’’ (common in biology literature). For
circular chromosomes, fusions and translocations are not distinguishable, that
is, every fusion of circular chromosomes can be viewed as a translocation,
and vice versa.
944 Genome Research
www.genome.org
Alekseyev and Pevzner
V = {bt, bh | b 2 B} [ {‘} (Fig. 3A,B; Supplemental Fig. S20). Figure 4
shows the breakpoint graph on 1357 synteny blocks4 of six
mammalian genomes:M (mouse), R (rat), D (dog), Q (macaque), H
(human), and C (chimpanzee).
A vertex in the breakpoint graph is regular if it is different
from ‘. Similarly, an edge is regular if both its endpoints are reg-
ular, and irregular otherwise. The edges of G(P1, . . . , Pk) are repre-
sented by undirected edges from the genomes P1, . . . , Pk of k
different colors (hence, the degree of each regular vertex is k). To
simplify the notation, we will use P1, . . . , Pk also to refer to the
colors of edges in the multiple breakpoint graph, and denote the
set of all colors C = {P1, . . . , Pk}. Furthermore, any non-empty
subset of C is called a multi-color. All edges connecting vertices x
and y in the (multiple) breakpoint graph form the multi-edge (x,
y) of the multi-color represented by the colors of these edges [e.g.,
the multi-edge (eh, f h) in Fig. 3B has multi-color {P3, P4} shown as
red and yellow edges]. The number of multi-edges incident to
a vertex (also equal to the number of adjacent vertices) is called the
multi-degree (note that the multi-degree of a vertex may be
smaller than its degree; e.g., the vertex eh in Fig. 3B has degree 4
and multi-degree 3). Multi-edges correspond to adjacent synteny
blocks that are conserved across multiple species and thus repre-
sent valuable phylogenetic characters (Sankoff and Blanchette
1998).
A breakpoint in the multiple breakpoint graph G(P1, P2, . . . ,
Pk) is a vertex of the multi-degree >1. A multiple breakpoint
graph without breakpoints is an identity breakpoint graph G(X, . . . ,
X) of some genome X. Alternatively, the identity breakpoint graph
can be characterized as a breakpoint graph consisting of complete
multi-edges (i.e., multi-edges of the multi-color C) that correspond
to the synteny blocks adjacencies in X.
Multiple genome rearrangement problem
The key observation in studies of pairwise genome rearrangements
is that every 2-break transformation of a ‘‘black’’ genome P into
a ‘‘green’’ genome Q corresponds to a transformation of the
breakpoint graph G (P, Q) into the identity breakpoint graph G (Q,
Q) (Supplemental Fig. S21) with 2-breaks on pairs of black edges
(black 2-breaks). MGR (Bourque and Pevzner 2002) implicitly
applies a similar observation and attempts to come up with rear-
rangements that bring themultiple breakpoint graphG (P1, P2, . . . ,
Pk) closer to the identity multiple breakpoint graph G(Pi, Pi, . . . , Pi)
for i varying from 1 to k. However, this approach does not allow
one to use the internal edges of the phylogenetic tree for finding
reliable rearrangements. Below we formalize theMultiple Genome
Rearrangement Problem in terms of multiple breakpoint graphs.
The key element of MGRA is finding a shortest transformation of
the multiple breakpoint graph G(P1, P2, . . . , Pk) into an arbitrary
identity multiple breakpoint graphG(X,X, . . . ,X) for some a priori
unknown genome X. We first illustrate this concept with pairwise
breakpoint graphs.
Let G(P1, P2)! G(X, X) be an m-step transformation of G(P1,
P2) into G(X, X) by either black or green 2-breaks (in contrast to
the standard breakpoint graph analysis based on black 2-breaks
only).5 It is easy to see that every such transformation corresponds
to a transformation P1 ! X ! P2 that uses m black 2-breaks.
Therefore, instead of searching for a shortest transformation G(P1,
P2) ! G(P2, P2), one can search for a shortest transformation of
G(P1, P2) into any identity breakpoint graph G(X, X) without
knowing X in advance.
In the case of k $ 2 genomes P1, P2, . . . , Pk, 2-breaks can be
applied to multi-edges in the multiple breakpoint graph G(P1,
Figure 2. (A) A 2-break on edges (x1, x2) and (y1, y2) from the same chromosome corresponds to either a reversal, or a fission. (B) A 2-break on edges
(x1, x2) and (y1, y2) from different chromosomes corresponds to a translocation/fusion. (C) A 2-break on edges (y1, y2) and (x1, ‘) of a linear chromosome
corresponds to a reversal affecting a chromosome end x1 and creating a new chromosome end y1. (D) A 2-break on edges (x1, ‘) and (y1, ‘) from different
chromosomes models a fusion. Fissions can be modeled as 2-breaks operating on an irregular loop edge (‘, ‘) and an arbitrary regular edge in the
genome.
4The detailed information about synteny blocks and assembly builds is pro-
vided in the Supplemental material. Out of 1360 synteny blocks (kindly
provided by Jian Ma), three synteny blocks represent intermixed segments of
the chromosome X and other chromosomes (the mouse chromosome 7 and
the rat chromosomes 15 and 20). Since these blocks are short (16, 47, and
17 kb, respectively), we have discarded them to simplify the chromosome X
analysis below. For better illustration of the breakpoint graphs, the vertex ‘ is
shown in multiple copies as black dots, each connected by a single multi-
edge to a regular vertex.
5 Switching from black rearrangements to a mixture of black and green
rearrangements is a simple but powerful paradigm that proved to be useful in
previous studies (Bafna and Pevzner 1998; Tannier and Sagot 2004).
Breakpoint graphs and ancestral reconstructions
Genome Research 945
www.genome.org
P2, . . . , Pk) of as many as (2
k  2) different multi-colors formed by
proper subsets of C. However, not every series of such 2-breaks
makes sense in terms of ancestral genome reconstructions. A basic
property of ancestral genome reconstructions is that 2-breaks on
multi-edges of multi-color Q 2 C can be applied only when all
genomes corresponding to colors in Q are merged into a single
genome. We give an alternative definition of this property as fol-
lows: A transformation (series of 2-breaks) S of the multiple
breakpoint graph G(P1, P2, . . . , Pk) is ‘‘strict’’ if for any 2-breaks
operating on multi-edges of multi-colors Q1 4 Q2, r1 precedes r2
in S. The Multiple Genome Rearrangement Problem (MGRP) is
reformulated as follows:
Given genomes P1, . . . , Pk, find a shortest strict series of 2-breaks
that transforms the breakpoint graph G (P1, . . . , Pk) into an identity
breakpoint graph.
Let T be a (unrooted) phylogenetic tree of the genomes
P1, . . . , Pk (Fig. 3A). The tree T consists of k leaf nodes (or simply
leaves), (k  2) internal nodes, and (2k  3) branches connecting
pairs of nodes, so that the degree of each leaf is 1, while the degree
of each internal node is 3.
Removing a branch from T breaks it into two subtrees, each of
which is induced by the set of its own leaves. A multi-color con-
sisting of all colors (leaves) of either of these induced subtrees is
called ‘‘T-consistent.’’ Let G be the set of all T-consistent multi-
colors. Note that if a multi-color Q is T-consistent, then its com-
plement Q = C \ Q is also T-consistent. Therefore, there is a
one-to-one correspondence between the pairs of complementary
T-consistent multi-colors and the branches of T (Fig. 5).
When a phylogenetic tree is given, MGRA addresses a re-
stricted version of MGRP where 2-breaks are applied only to multi-
colors consistent with the phylogenetic tree.
The Tree-Consistent Multiple Genome Rearrangement Prob-
lem (TCMGRP) is as follows:
Given genomes P1, . . . , Pk at the leaves of a phylogenetic tree T,
find a shortest strict series of T-consistent 2-breaks, transforming
the breakpoint graph G(P1, . . . , Pk) into an identity breakpoint graph.
Note that MGRP and TCMGRP problems in the case of three
unichromosomal genomes correspond to the median problem
that is NP-complete (Caprara 1999a; Tannier et al. 2008). While
existence of exact polynomial algorithms for solving MGRP and
TCMGRP is unlikely, we describe a heuristic approach to ‘‘elimi-
nating’’ breakpoints in G(P1, . . . , Pk) that uses reliable rearrange-
ments. In particular, MGRA optimally solves these problems in
case of semi-independent rearrangement scenarios with some
breakpoint reuses (see below).
We will find it convenient to fix a branch x of the tree T
and assume that this branch contains a root X (viewed as yet
another node), the precise location of which is to be deter-
mined later. The choice of X defines directions ‘‘toward’’ X on
all branches of the tree T (Fig. 5). We label every leaf node Pi of
the directed tree T with the corresponding singleton multi-
color {Pi}, and then recursively label each internal node with the
union of the multi-colors of the starting nodes of all in-
coming branches (e.g., in Fig. 5, a common endpoint of bran-
ches coming from the leaf nodes M and R is labeled MR).
The multi-colors forming node labels of the tree T are called
Figure 3. (A) A phylogenetic tree T with four linear genomes P1, P2, P3, P4 (represented as green, blue, red, and yellow graphs, respectively) at the
leaves. The obverse edges are not shown. (B) The multiple breakpoint graph G(P1, P2, P3, P4) is a superposition of graphs representing genomes P1, P2, P3,
P4. The multi-degrees of regular vertices vary from 1 (e.g., vertex b
h ) to 3 (e.g., vertex eh ). (C ) The same phylogenetic tree T with all intermediate
genomes specified and a genome X selected as a root. A T-consistent transformation of X into P1, P2, P3, P4 can viewed as a transformation of the
quadruple (X, X, X, X) into the quadruple (P1, P2, P3, P4), where a rearrangement at each step is applied to some copies of the same genome in the
quadruple. A particular such transformation takes the following steps: (X, X, X, X )
!r1 (X, X, Q1, Q1) !r2 (Q3, Q3, Q1, Q1) !r3 (Q3, Q3, Q2, Q2)
!r4 (Q3, Q3, P3, Q2) !r5 (Q3, Q3, P3, P4) !r6 (P1, Q3, P3, P4) !r7 (P1, P2, P3, P4), where r1 is a reversal in two copies of X; r2 is a fission in two
copies of X; r3 is a reversal in both copies of Q1; r4 is a fission in one copy ofQ2; r5 is a reversal in the other copy of Q2; r6 is a reversal in one copy of Q3; and
r7 is a translocation in the other copy of Q3.
Alekseyev and Pevzner
946 Genome Research
www.genome.org
‘‘T
!
-consistent.’’ Alternatively, T
!
-consistent multi-colors can
be defined as T-consistent multi-colors whose induced subtrees
do not contain x. Note that exactly one of the multi-colors in
each pair of complementary T-consistent multi-colors is T
!
-
consistent and it labels the starting node of the corresponding
directed branch in T (except for the multi-colors corresponding to
the branch x that both are T
!
-consistent).
MGRA transforms the genomes P1, . . . , Pk into X along
the directed branches of T, using 2-breaks on T
!
-consistent multi-
colors (T
!
-consistent 2-breaks). In terms of breakpoint graphs,
MGRA eliminates breakpoints in G(P1, P2, . . . , Pk) with T
!
-consis-
tent 2-breaks and transforms it into the identity breakpoint
graph G(X, . . . , X).6 This transformation defines a reverse trans-
formation of the genome X into the genomes P1, . . . , Pk by T
!
-
consistent 2-breaks (such as in Fig. 3C). MGRA keeps track of
Figure 4. The breakspoint graph G(M,R,D,Q,H,C) (obverse edges are not shown) of six mammalian genomes: mouse (red edges), rat (blue edges), dog
(green edges), macaque (violet edges), human (orange edges), and chimpanzee (yellow edges). The graph has 13573 2 = 2714 vertices labeled as nt or
nh (where n is a synteny block number) and colored in 23 colors representing chromosomes in the human genome.
6The use of T
!
-consistent 2-breaks here is motivated by an important prop-
erty that every T
!
-consistent transformation can be turned into a strict T
!
-
consistent transformation by changing the order of 2-breaks. Therefore, we
do not directly address the strictness requirement in MGRA that first produces
a T
!
-consistent transformation of the genomes P1, P2, . . . , Pk into the genome
X and then reorders it into a strict transformation.
Breakpoint graphs and ancestral reconstructions
Genome Research 947
www.genome.org
rearrangements applied to the breakpoint graph G(P1, . . . , Pk)
during its transformation into an identity breakpoint graph
G(X, . . . , X). The recorded rearrangements (in the reverse order)
define a reverse transformation that passes through every internal
node of the tree T and, thus, can be used to reconstruct the an-
cestral genomes at the internal nodes of T.
While initial steps in transformation of the breakpoint graph
G(P1, . . . , Pk) into an identity breakpoint graph usually correspond
to reliable rearrangements, sooner or later one needs to use less
reliable heuristic arguments in order to complete the trans-
formation. However, sometimes it is preferable to stop after
reaching a certain level of reliability even if the transformation is
not complete (and the TCMGRP problem is not solved). In this
case, we stop short of reconstructing the ancestral genomes since
the transformation has not resulted in an identity breakpoint
graph. In Supplement C, we describe an alternative method (not
requiring solution of the TCMGRP problem) for reliable re-
construction of (parts of) ancestral genomes (similar to CARs
from Ma et al. 2006) at internal nodes of the phylogenetic tree.
Results
MGRA algorithm
Supplement A introduces the notion of independent (no break-
point reuses), semi-independent (breakpoint reusesmay occur only
within single branches of the phylogenetic tree), and weakly
independent (breakpoint reuses are limited to adjacent branches of
the phylogenetic tree) rearrangements. MGRA optimally solves the
MGRP problem in case of semi-independent 2-breaks and uses
heuristics to move beyond the semi-independent assumption. Be-
lowwe show that most 2-breaks inmammalian evolution are either
independent, semi-independent, or weakly independent, resulting
in reliable ancestral reconstructions.
Cycles and paths in the breakpoint graph
Visual inspection of a rather complex breakpoint graph in Figure
4 (the giant component contains 630 vertices) reveals a large
number of cycles and simple paths that are characteristic of
independent and semi-independent rearrangement scenarios.
MGRA uses the cycles/paths in the breakpoint graphs as a guide
for finding reliable ancestor reconstructions.
We note that the immediate result of a 2-break performed
along a branch Q + Q in the phylogenetic tree T is a cycle of
four multi-edges whose multi-colors alternate between Q and Q.
All vertices in this cycle have multi-degree 2 and represent
breakpoints that were not ‘‘reused.’’ Even if one of these multi-
edges is used in later rearrangements, the remaining three multi-
edges still form an alternating path that serves as a footprint of the
2-break. This observation motivates a search for alternating paths
and cycles in the breakpoint graphs. We introduce the following
definitions to analyze such cycles/paths.
We define a simple vertex as a regular vertex of multi-
degree 2 and a simple multi-edge as a multi-edge connecting two
simple vertices. Simple multi-edges form simple cycles/paths in the
breakpoint graphs, that is, cycles/paths in which multi-colors of
consecutive multi-edges alternate between Q and Q. Simple multi-
edges/paths/cycles are called ‘‘good’’ if their multi-colors are
T-consistent.
Table 1A describes the statistics of the breakpoint graph and
illustrates how rearrangement analysis contributes to construction
of phylogenetic trees. Indeed, all three internal branches (correct
tree partitions) are supported by large numbers of good paths/
cycles and good multi-edges (86 and 305 for MR + DQHC, 37 and
111 for MRD + QHC, 30 and 87 for HC + MRDQ). Each of 32 in-
correct partitions (only eight of them are shown in Table 1A) have
at most one simple path/cycle and at most six simple multi-edges,
an order of magnitude smaller number than non-trivial correct
partitions. This observation illustrates that reconstruction of the
correct tree topology is a simple exercise in this case (see Chaisson
et al. 2006). This and other statistics produced by MGRA (see be-
low) may be used to determine the phylogenetic tree rather than
to assume that it is given. In contrast to Cannarozzi et al. (2007),
MGRA provides a large number of certificates supporting the tree
topology in Figure 5. Below we show how MGRA reconstructs the
ancestral genomes.
MGRA Stage 1: Processing good cycles and paths
Alternating cycles represent well-studied objects in the case of the
pairwise breakpoint graphs. Every such cycle of length 2m is
formed by (m  1) 2-breaks (Alekseyev and Pevzner 2008) in each
most parsimonious scenario.7 Therefore, there is little difference
between alternating cycles in the pairwise breakpoint graphs and
good cycles in the multiple breakpoint graphs: indeed, the good
cycles with alternating multi-colors Q and Q in the breakpoint
graph model the rearrangements separating the sets of the
genomes Q and Q exactly in the same way as in the pairwise ge-
nome comparison.We therefore argue that such alternating cycles
(and the corresponding rearrangements) can be reliably assigned
to the branch Q + Q in the phylogenetic tree T. This operation
generalizes the notion of ‘‘good rearrangements’’ in MGR by
extending them from cycles alternating multi-colors Pi and Pi=
{P1, . . . , Pi1, Pi+1, . . . , Pk} to cycles alternating any complementary
T-consistent multi-colors. While MGR attempts to find rear-
rangements bringing Pi closer to all genomes from Pi (i.e., rear-
rangements on the leaf branches of the phylogenetic tree),
MGRA processes reliable rearrangements on all (both leaf and in-
ternal) branches of the phylogenetic tree (c.f. Zhao and Bourque
2007).
Figure 5. The phylogenetic tree T of six mammalian genomes: mouse
(red), rat (blue), dog (green), macaque (violet), human (orange), and
chimpanzee (yellow) with a root X on the MRD + QHC branch. The
branches are directed toward X and labeled with the corresponding pairs
of complementary T-consistent multi-colors. The T
!
-consistent multi-
color from each pair also labels the starting node of the corresponding
directed branch. Note that the tree orientation may not necessarily cor-
relate with the time scale, and the root genome Xmay not necessarily be
a common ancestor of the leaf genomes.
7While this representation is not unique, all these representations are
equivalent (i.e., they produce the same final result). Figure 6B illustrates
transformation of a simple cycle on six vertices into three complete multi-
edges with two 2-breaks.
Alekseyev and Pevzner
948 Genome Research
www.genome.org
Similarly, good paths can be also assigned to branches of the
phylogenetic tree by transforming them into good cycles first.
Consider a good path x1, x2, . . . , xm consisting of (m  1) multi-
edges with T-consistent multi-colors alternating between a multi-
colorQ of themulti-edge (x1, x2) and its complementQ. We extend
this path by vertices x0 and xm + 1 incident to its first and last
vertices, respectively, resulting in the path p = (x0, x1, x2, . . . , xm + 1).
If the first and the last multi-edges in this path have the same T
!
-
consistent multi-color, we perform a 2-break over the multi-edges
(x0, x1) and (xm, xm + 1) to transform p into a good cycle c = (x1,
x2, . . . , xm) and a multi-edge (x0, xm + 1) (Fig. 6A,C).
8 If the first
or/and last multi-edges of p are of non-T
!
-consistent multi-color,
we remove it/them to obtain a path flanked by a T
!
-consistent
multi-color that is processed (if it is longer than one edge) as
above. Note that processing good cycles/paths in the breakpoint
graph can create new good cycles/paths. We therefore process the
good cycles/paths in an iterative fashion until no more good
cycles/paths remain.9
Figure 7 (top panel) shows the breakpoint graph after pro-
cessing (i.e., removing) good cycles/paths and illustrates that it is
significantly simplified as compared to Figure 4. The size of the
giant component is reduced from 630 to 193 vertices, and the
overall number of vertices (not counting vertices incident to
complete multi-edges) is reduced 10-fold from 2712 to 253. Figure
7 (top panel) illustrates how MGRA improves upon MGR: MGR
is able to reduce the same graph only threefold to 924 vertices
(414 vertices in the giant component) before it runs out of
good rearrangements. While MGRA Stage 1 greatly reduces the
rearrangement distance between the analyzed genomes, Sup-
plemental Table S5 (center panel) illustrates that it still does not
reveal the ancestral genomesMR,MRD,HC, andQHC. Moreover, it
is not clear how to derive these ancestors based on a rather com-
plex topology of the breakpoint graph in Figure 7 (top panel).
MGRA Stage 2 introduces the notion of fair cycles/paths that
allows one to reveal the rearrangements that violate the semi-
independence assumption and to further simplify the graph in
Figure 7 (top panel).
The results of MGRA Stage 1 already reveal valuable insights
about the ancestral genomes (even without MGRA Stage 2).
To simplify the analysis of the Boreoeutherian ancestral re-
construction10 by MGRA Stage 1, we restrict the set of genomes to
single representatives of rodents (mouse), carnivores (dog), and
primates (macaque). The resulting breakpoint graph (with obverse
edges shown) reveals many long unicolored paths formed by al-
ternating obverse edges and complete multi-edges (Supplemental
Fig. S10). Such paths represent parts of different human chromo-
somes in the reconstructed ancestor genome. We compress every
such path into a single rectangular vertex as shown in Supple-
mental Figure S11 (top panel), resulting in a rather small graph.
We further show the chromosomal associations present in this
graph in Supplemental Figure S12. We emphasize that MGRA
Stage 1 reveals some subtle but reliable adjacencies that other
ancestral reconstruction algorithms may miss. In particular, it
reveals two adjacencies that are absent in any of the extant
genomes andmany adjacencies that are present in only one of the
extant genomes.
The compressed breakpoint graph reveals only 5 complete
multi-edges connecting vertices of different colors: 12 + 22, 12 +
22, 3 + 21, 4 + 8, and 14 + 15. These are exactly the same five
adjacencies 12a + 22a, 12b + 22b, 3 + 21, 4a + 8p, 14 + 15 revealed
in Ma et al. (2006). It also reveals the CARs corresponding to the
human chromosomes 2, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 10, 11, 17, 18, and
X (represented as isolated boxes in Supplemental Fig. S12), exactly
the same as the ancestral chromosomes revealed by previous
cytogenetics analysis (Froenicke et al. 2006) (2q, 2pq, 5, 6, 7a,
8q, 9, 10q, 11, 17, 18, X) with a single exception: The second
segment from chromosome 10 is identified as an isolated chro-
mosome by us and is tentatively assigned as 10p + 12a + 22a by
Table 1A. The statistics of the breakpoint graph of the mouse,
rat, dog, macaque, human, and chimpanzee genomes
Multi-colors Multi-edges
Simple
vertices
Simple
multi-edges
Simple
paths
R + MDQHC 1173 1080 1036 235
MR + DQHC 487 376 305 86
D + MRQHC 473 368 310 105
M + RDQHC 223 145 118 45
MRD + QHC 208 135 111 37
Q + MRDHC 162 130 120 33
HC + MRDQ 140 104 87 30
C + MRDQH 45 32 26 11
H + MRDQC 15 8 6 3
QC + MRDH 9 6 6 1
MRQ + DHC 8 1 0 0
MD + RQHC 8 1 0 0
QH + MRDC 7 2 1 1
RQ + MDHC 7 4 4 1
DC + MRQH 6 4 4 1
DQ + MRHC 5 0 0 0
; + MRDQHC 2 0 0 0
MRC + DQH 1 0 0 0
Table 1B. The statistics of the breakpoint graph of the mouse,
dog, macaque, and opossum genomes after MGRA Stages 1 and 2
on confident branches
Multi-colors Multi-edges
Simple
vertices
Simple
multi-edges
Simple
paths
; + MDQO 1693 0 0 0
O + MDQ 45 4 0 0
M + DQO 42 4 0 0
Q + MDO 35 0 0 0
D + MQO 26 0 0 0
MO + DQ 26 5 2 1
MD + QO 19 7 4 1
MQ + DO 12 3 0 0
For every pair of complementary multi-colors, we show the number of
multi-edges of these multi-colors, the number of simple vertices that are
incident to such multi-edges, the number of simple multi-edges, and the
number of simple paths and cycles. The T-consistent multi-colors are
shown in bold. (A) Only 18 out of 32 possible multi-colors are shown (the
remaining 14 multi-colors have zero corresponding multi-edges). (B) See
Supplemental Figure S18, bottom.
8 In the special case x0 = xm + 1 = ‘, and the flanking edges are of the same
T
!
-consistent multi-color; we perform a fusion 2-break as shown in Figure 6D.
In the case of m = 1 (i.e., when p contains a single simple multi-edge), c
represents a complete multi-edge rather than a cycle (Fig. 6C) and does
not require further processing.
9One can prove that the topology of the resulting graph does not depend on
the order in which good cycles/paths are processed.
10We use the MRD node of the phylogenetic tree in Figure 5 to approximate
the Boreoeutherian ancestor. While this study focuses on the Boreoeutherian
ancestor, MGRA reconstructs ancestral genomes for every node of the phy-
logenetic tree. We emphasize that while reconstruction starts with selection
of the root branch (as in Fig. 5), the choice of this branch and the exact
location of the root X on this branch are rather arbitrary and not correlated
with a specific ancestral genome of interest (in contrast to the alternative
‘‘root-driven’’ approach described in Supplement C). As described in the
Reconstructing Ancestral Genomes section, the ancestral genomes are de-
fined by the reverse transformation from the (whatever) root genome X to
the leaf genomes. Ideally, different choices of the root branch and locations
of the root X itself will result in the same set of ancestral genomes.
Breakpoint graphs and ancestral reconstructions
Genome Research 949
www.genome.org
Froenicke et al. (2006). However, Froenicke et al. (2006) ac-
knowledged that the association of 10p and 12a is only weakly
supported (indicated by a question mark in Froenicke et al.
2006).11 Our analysis also rules out the associations 1 + 22, 5 + 19,
2 + 18, 1 + 10, and 20 + 2 suggested inMurphy et al. (2005) as weak
associations and later criticized by Froenicke et al. (2006) as un-
reliable. Supplement D further focuses on the connected compo-
nent of the breakpoint graph representing the human chro-
mosomes 7, 16, and 19, where the cytogenetics approach dis-
agrees with Ma et al. (2006).
MGRA Stage 2: Processing fair cycles and paths
Figure 7 (top panel) reveals many pairs of vertices of multi-degree
3 connected by a multi-edge. Each such multi-edge (x, y) cor-
responds to six vertices x, x1, x2, y, y1, y2 and five multi-edges (x, y),
(x, x1), (x, x2), (y, y1), (y, y2) (including cases with xi = ‘, yi = ‘, or
xi = yj for some 1 # i, j # 2). A multi-edge (x, y) is called composite
if edges (x, x1) and (y, y1) have the same
multi-colorQ1 and edges (x, x2) and (y, y2)
have the same multi-color Q2. A com-
posite multi-edge is called fair if Q1 and
Q2 represent T-consistent multi-colors
(Fig. 6, bottom panel). Table 2 shows
the statistics of composite multi-edges
(depending on pairs of complementary
multi-colors Q1 + Q1and Q2 + Q2) and
reveals that (1) most composite multi-
edges are fair and (2) while some types of
composite multi-edges are common [e.g.,
(M+, R+), (M+, MR+), (R+, MR+), (MR+,
D+), (D+, QHC+), (MR+, QHC+)], others
[e.g., (Q+, R+)] are either rare or absent.
Table 2 illustrates the extremely biased
statistics of composite multi-edges: The
branches Q1 + Q1 and Q2 + Q2 corre-
sponding to themulti-colorsQ1 andQ2 of
a composite multi-edge are likely adja-
cent in the phylogenetic tree (compare
to the weakly independent rearrange-
ments). Table 2 provides yet another il-
lustration of utility of MGRA for deriving
phylogenetic trees. Indeed, it reveals
valuable information about the topology
of the phylogenetic tree (incident edges)
that can be combined with information
(valid partitions) in Table 1A,B to infer
the trees.
Every fair multi-edge (x, y) can be
transformed into a good multi-edge by
a 2-break (fair 2-break) either on multi-
edges (x, x1) and (y, y1) (of multi-color Q1)
or on multi-edges (x, x2) and (y, y2) (of
multi-color Q2) (Fig. 6, bottom panel). In
the former case, (x, y) is transformed into
a good multi-edge of color Q2, while in
the latter case, it is transformed into
a good multi-edge of color Q1. The
resulting good paths (formed by fair 2-
breaks) can be further processed as de-
scribed in MGRA Stage 1. An important observation is that the
final result of processing a fair multi-edge does not depend on
whether we start with a 2-break on Q1 or Q2 multi-color (see Fig. 6,
bottom panel). A cycle/path in the breakpoint graph is called fair if
(1) all its edges are either good or fair, and (2) it can be transformed
into a good cycle/path by some fair 2-breaks.
MGRA Stage 2 detects fair paths/cycles, transforms them into
good paths/cycles by fair 2-breaks, and further processes the
resulting good paths/cycles as in MGRA Stage 1. In some cases, fair
paths in Stage 2 should be chosen with caution since the choice of
fair paths may influence ancestral reconstructions in some nodes
(see Supplement E). Figure 7 (bottom panel) shows the breakpoint
graph after processing fair cycles/paths and illustrates that it
becomes so small that it now can be analyzed in a step-by-case
fashion by brute-force analysis of every connected component.
Reconstructing ancestral genomes
After removing vertex ‘, the breakpoint graph (after MGRA Stage
2) consists of only nine connected components (Fig. 7, bottom
panel). Five out of nine components contain vertices corre-
sponding to both start and end of the same synteny blocks 80,
610, 795, 1290, and 1300. This is surprising since generally
Figure 6. (Top panel) Processing good paths using a T
!
-consistent red–blue multi-color. (A) A good
path on vertices x1, x2,. . ., x6 is transformed into a cycle on the same vertices by extending it into x0, x1,
x2,. . ., x6, x7 and performing a 2-break on the multi-edges (x0, x1) and (x6, x7). (B) Transformation of
a good cycle on 6 vertices into complete multi-edges with a 2-break on the multi-edges (x1, x2), (x3, x4)
followed by a 2-break on the multi-edges (x1, x4), (x5, x6). (C ) A 2-break on an irregular edge corre-
sponds to a reversal involving chromosome ends. (D) A 2-break on two irregular edges corresponds to
a fusion. (Bottom panel) Two ways of transforming a fair edge (x, y) into a good edge: (top) by a 2-break
on yellow edges or (bottom) by a 2-break on green edges. In either case, the follow-up processing of the
generated simple path results in the same graph with the complete multi-edge (x, y).
11We are not claiming that this association does not exist since it may be
present in some of 100+ genomes with available cytogenetics data. However,
there is no support for this association in the six mammalian genomes. We
remark that Ma et al. (2006) also did not find support for this association.
Alekseyev and Pevzner
950 Genome Research
www.genome.org
the start and end of a synteny block are not expected to be present
in the same (small) connected component unless this block was
subject to a ‘‘micro-inversion’’ (Chaisson et al. 2006). Indeed,
blocks 80, 610, 795, 1290, and 1300 turned out to be short (all
under 500 kb), with blocks 610, 1290, and 1300 even shorter than
100 kb (block 1300 is 91 kb in human, 41 kb in mouse, and only
10 kb in the dog genome) that is near the threshold of 50 kb used
in Ma et al. (2006) for generating reliable synteny blocks.
The simplest way to deal with such short blocks is to simply
remove them from the set of input synteny blocks (Supplement J).
Such removal will not significantly affect the architecture of
the ancestral genomes (indeed, these blocks are well below the
resolution of the cytogenetics approaches) while at the same
time resolving five out of nine remaining components in the
graph. Supplement F describes a different approach that attempts
to find the positions and orientations of such short synteny
blocks in the ancestors by processing complex breakpoints
(MGRA Stage 3). We remark that processing at MGRA Stage 3 is
viewed as less reliable, and the resulting associations are not
considered in the proposed ancestral reconstructions (see below).
Recall that a strict T-consistent rearrangement scenario
uniquely defines ancestral genomes at all internal nodes of the
phylogenetic tree T. However, because of
the use of 2-breaks instead of reversals/
translocations/fissions/fusions, the an-
cestral genomes initially obtained by
MGRA may contain (a small number of)
circular chromosomes. Whenever possi-
ble, MGRA linearizes them by rearrang-
ing 2-breaks in the transformation.While
circular chromosomes may occasionally
appear in the initial rearrangement sce-
nario obtained by MGRA, their appear-
ance is a result of either 2-breaks applied
in the ‘‘wrong’’ order (that can be avoided
by reordering the 2-breaks [see Pevzner
2000], or a ‘‘shortcut’’ in processing hur-
dles that can be remedied by introducing
additional 2-breaks [Hannenhalli and
Pevzner 1999]). MGRA eliminates possi-
ble circular chromosomes in the recon-
structed genomes at the post-processing
stage. We emphasize that the outcome
of MGRA is the set of ancestral (linear)
genomes, while the 2-break rearrange-
ment scenario produced by MGRA is
considered only as a starting point
for constructing the reversals/trans-
locations/fusions/fissions scenario. An
optimal linear rearrangement scenario
can be found by applying GRIMM to
the ancestral genomes reconstructed by
MGRA.
Supplemental Figure S14 illustrates
the results of ancestral genome re-
construction for chromosome X for
six mammalian genomes. Supplement H
shows the pairwise rearrangement dis-
tances between the ancestral and leaf
genomes, following the strict T-consis-
tent transformation constructed by
MGRA and compares them to the geno-
mic distances computed by GRIMM
(Tesler 2002b). The differences between
these distances are rather small, suggest-
ing that the T
!
-consistent transformation found by MGRA is close
to the most parsimonious.
Benchmarking MGRA
Benchmarking of the ancestral genome reconstruction algorithms
may be challenging since the architecture of ancestral genomes is
not known. While MGR, GRAPPA, inferCARs, and MGRA showed
excellent performance on simulated data sets, these benchmarks
were mainly designed for rearrangements generated according to
the Random Breakage Model (RBM). Since MGRA improves on
MGR and is guaranteed to produce optimal solutions for semi-
independent scenarios, it is bound to provide even better results
than MGR on such benchmarks. Supplement L compares MGRA
and inferCARs on simulated data and illustrates that MGRA gen-
erates more accurate ancestral reconstructions for all choices of
parameters. However, analyzing all these tools on simulated data
may generate over-optimistic results since RBM does not reflect
the realities of mammalian evolution (Bailey et al. 2004; van der
Wind et al. 2004; Zhao et al. 2004;Murphy et al. 2005;Webber and
Ponting 2005; Hinsch and Hannenhalli 2006; Ruiz-Herrera et al.
2006; Yue and Haaf 2006; Caceres et al. 2007; Gordon et al. 2007;
Figure 7. The breakpoint graph G(M,R,D,Q,H,C) (the complete multi-edges are not shown) after
MGRA Stage 1 (top panel) and after MGRA Stages 1–2 (bottom panel). The edge colors represent mouse
(red), rat (blue), dog (green), macaque (violet), human (orange), and chimpanzee (yellow) genomes.
Vertices are labeled and colored similarly to Figure 4.
Breakpoint graphs and ancestral reconstructions
Genome Research 951
www.genome.org
Kikuta et al. 2007; Mehan et al. 2007). We therefore decided to
analyze the differences between MGRA and inferCARs recon-
structions and to further track evidence for each such difference in
a case-by-case fashion.
MGRA and inferCARs produce highly consistent ancestral
reconstructions. For illustration purposes, we have chosen to focus
on the reconstruction of the MRD ancestral genome (Fig. 5),
remarking that the results for the other ancestor genomes are
similar. As an input to inferCARs, we provided six mammalian
genomes and the same phylogenetic tree as used in Ma et al.
(2006). TheMRD genomes reconstructed by MGRA and inferCARs
consist of 25 and 30 chromosomes (CARs), respectively.12 How-
ever, MGRA does not consider associations obtained at Stage 3
(Fig. 7, bottom panel) as reliable. Most of these associations cor-
respond to micro-inversions and thus do not significantly affect
the ancestral reconstructions.
Comparison of two inferCARs reconstructions and using
MGRA to improve inferCARs ancestral reconstructions
We start by comparing inferCARs with itself on two inputs: the
original six mammalian genomes M, R, D, Q, H, C and the
genomes M9, R9, D9, Q9, H9, C9 produced by MGRA Stage 1 (Fig. 7,
top panel). We denote the reconstructed MRD genomes as
MRDCARs and MRD9CARs, respectively.
SinceMGRA Stage 1 processes only good cycles/paths that are
unambiguously present in every optimal rearrangement scenario,
one can safely assume that any optimal ancestral reconstruction
should include the rearrangements performed at Stage 1. There-
fore, running inferCARs on M, R, D, Q, H, C genomes should
ideally produce the same results as running inferCARs on the
‘‘equivalent’’ M9, R9, D9, Q9, H9, C9 genomes. However, since
inferCARs makes some greedy decisions and does not claim opti-
mality, it does not guarantee to produce the same results on M, R,
D, Q, H, C as compared with M9, R9, D9, Q9, H9, C9. Any such in-
consistency would point to either somewhat less reliable CARs
reconstructed by inferCARs or to reliable adjacencies missed by
inferCARs. Therefore, inferCARs reconstructions can be poten-
tially improved if MGRA Stage 1 runs before inferCARs as a pre-
processing step.
Comparison of the reconstructed genomes MRDCARs and
MRD9CARs indicates that while they share the overwhelming ma-
jority (99.0%) of reconstructed adjacencies, there are 13 adjacen-
cies present in MRDCARs but absent in MRD9CARs and 13
adjacencies absent inMRDCARs but present inMRDCARs (out of the
1325 reconstructed adjacencies). Figure 8 (top) displays the
breakpoint graph between the corresponding MRDCARs and
MRDCARs reconstructions and reveals that the MRD9CARs re-
construction is arguably more reliable than the MRDCARs re-
construction. Indeed, Figure 8 (top) reveals that while most of the
adjacencies (12 out of 13) present inMRDCARs but not inMRD9CARs
correspond to ‘‘ambiguous joins’’ (in terms of Ma et al. 2006),
MRD9CARs contains four reliable adjacencies (i.e., resolved by
MGRA Stage 1) that are nevertheless absent in MRDCARs.
To resolve the conflicts between inferCARs results on equiv-
alent inputs, we analyze each of these adjacencies [(658h, 652h),
(871t, 873t), (770t, 771t), and (1014t, 1017h)] in a case-by-case
fashion. For example, in the case of the (658h, 652h) adjacency,
inferCARs failed to connect them, since the vertices 658h and
652h represent breakpoints of multi-degree 3 (Fig. 8, bottom
panels), and it is not immediately clear how to process them using
‘‘local’’ rules employed by inferCARs. inferCARs turns 658h into
a CAR end inMRD, although it is not a chromosome end in any of
the six genomes. The breakpoint graph provides a clear view of
connection between 658h and 652h by revealing good paths
connecting them (see Fig. 8, bottom panels).
Comparison of inferCARs and MGRA reconstructions
Supplemental Figure S19 displays the breakpoint graph of the
three MRD reconstructions: MRDMGRA, MRDCARs, and MRD9CARs,
and illustrates that the number of differences between MRDCARs
and MRD9CARs (we consider the latter reconstruction to be more
reliable) is comparable to the number of differences between
MRDMGRA and MRD9CARs. Indeed, MRD9CARs differs from MRDCARs
by 30 adjacencies and differs from MRDMGRA by 39 adjacencies.
Since the large-scale architecture of MRDCARs was shown to be
largely consistent with previous cytogenetics reconstructions (Ma
et al. 2006) and since MRD9CARs (that is arguably even more reli-
able than MRDCARs) and MRDMGRA share at least 98.5% of all ad-
jacencies, all these reconstructions can be viewed as largely
consistent with the cytogenetics-based reconstructions. Remark-
ably, most differences between MGRA and inferCARs recon-
structions are represented by ambiguous joins that MGRA labels as
less reliable anyway (shown as dashed edges). In particular, infer-
CARs reports eight less reliable adjacencies as unambiguous
(complete multi-edges with dashed purple edges in Supplemental
Fig. S19). However, most of them correspond to micro-inversions
and have minor effects on the large-scale ancestral architectures
(see Supplement I for detailed comparison of MGRA and infer-
CARs reconstructions). Table 3 shows the genomic distances from
MRDMGRA and MRDCARs to each of the six leaf genomes and
illustrates that MGRA results in a slightly more parsimonious
scenario as compared to inferCARs (the total distance is 1503 for
MGRA and 1518 for inferCARs).
The primate–rodent–carnivore split in mammalian evolution
Knowledge of the correct phylogeny is an important prerequisite
for many comparative genomics approaches (Blanchette and
Table 2. The statistics of composite multi-edges (nonzero counts
only) in the breakpoint graph G(M, R, D, Q, H, C) after MGRA
Stage 1
M+ R+ MR+ D+ MRD+ Q+ HC+ H+ C+ DQ+ QH+ RD+
M+ — 19 11 3
R+ 19 — 21 8 2 3 4 2
MR+ 11 21 — 19 7 2 1
D+ 3 8 19 — 11 2 1 2
MRD+ 2 7 11 — 4 1 2 2
Q+ 3 — 4 1
HC+ 4 2 2 4 4 — 1
H+ 1 —
C+ 1 2 1 1 —
DQ+ 1 —
QH+ 2 —
RD+ 2 2 —
Each pair of complementary multi-colors is denoted by one of its repre-
sentative multi-colors (e.g., M+ represents the complementary multi-
colors M + RDQHC). The bold row/column labels correspond to T-
consistent (pairs of) multi-colors. The shaded entries correspond to pairs
of adjacent branches in the phylogenetic tree T and account for 87% of all
composite multi-edges.
12 inferCARs reconstructions slightly differ from those reported in Ma et al.
(2006) since we use the synteny blocks from the latest builds of mammalian
genomes (provided by Jian Ma, University of California, Santa Cruz). Similar
to Ma et al. (2006) and Kemkemer et al. (2006), we ignore very short CARs
blocks in both inferCARs and MGRA reconstructions to simplify the analysis
(see Supplemental Table S14).
Alekseyev and Pevzner
952 Genome Research
www.genome.org
Tompa 2002; Kellis et al. 2003). However, even the basic features of
the mammalian phylogeny (e.g., the primate–rodent–carnivore
split) remain controversial (Fig. 9). While the morphology studies
support the primate–rodent clade (Shoshani and McKenna 1998),
the early molecular studies supported the primate–carnivore clade
(Graur 1993; Janke et al. 1994; Kumar and Hedges 1998; Reyes
Figure 8. (Top panel) The breakpoint graph of the genomesMRDCARs (cyan) andMRD9CARs (orange) reconstructed by inferCARs (common adjacencies
are not shown). (Bold edges) Reliable adjacencies (resolved by MGRA Stage 1); (dashed edges) ‘‘ambiguous joins’’ (see Ma et al. 2006) made by
inferCARs. Vertex colors are coded as in Figure 4. (Bottom panel) A most parsimonious transformation of one connected component (containing vertices
658h and 652h) of the breakpoint graph G(M,R,D,Q,H,C) from Figure 4. (First panel from left) The initial component is transformed with (second panel)
a 2-break in primates, (third panel) a 2-break in rodents, and (fourth panel) two 2-breaks in dog resulting from processing of a good D + MRQCH path.
Breakpoint graphs and ancestral reconstructions
Genome Research 953
www.genome.org
et al. 2000). Although starting from Murphy et al. (2001), the
phylogeny based on the primate–rodent clade (Madsen et al. 2001;
Poux et al. 2002; Amrine-Madsen et al. 2003; Thomas et al. 2003;
Reyes et al. 2004) has become widely accepted, the question is far
from being settled: recent studies provided arguments against the
primate–rodent clade (Arnason et al. 2002; Misawa and Janke
2003; Jorgensen et al. 2005; Cannarozzi et al. 2007; Huerta-Cepas
et al. 2007; Huttley et al. 2007; Niimura and Nei 2007). Below
we analyze some rearrangement-based characters supporting
both the primate–carnivore and (to a smaller extent) the primate–
rodent clade. Similarly to other approaches, the rearrangement
analysis reveals some pros and cons for each alternative but does
not definitely resolve the long-stranding controversy.
Chaisson et al. (2006) made an attempt to analyze mamma-
lian phylogeny using micro-rearrangements in the CFTR re-
gion representing 0.06% of mammalian genomes. However, the
small size of this region and ambiguities in revealing micro-
rearrangements between distantmammalsmade it difficult to find
micro-rearrangements that can certify the deep branches of the
mammalian phylogenetic tree. Cannarozzi et al. (2007) made an
attempt to analyze large-scale rearrangements (as opposed to
micro-rearrangements) for reconstructing the mammalian evolu-
tionary history. Their approach, while promising, left many
questions unanswered. In particular, Cannarozzi et al. (2007)
discussed only reversals and ignored translocations, fusions, and
fissions. Also, they computed the reversal distances using a (un-
published) greedy algorithm. Since breakpoint reuse is prominent
(Pevzner and Tesler 2003) in mammalian evolution, greedy
approaches are unlikely to provide an adequate rearrangement
scenario. Finally, Cannarozzi et al. (2007) used the ‘‘distance-
based’’ rather than ‘‘character-based’’ methods for computing the
phylogenetic tree. It is well known that the performance of the
distance-based methods deteriorates in the case of the large
breakpoint reuse typical for mammalian genomes.
Lunter (2007) criticized Cannarozzi et al. (2007) and wrote in
April 2007: ‘‘It appears unjustified to continue to consider the
phylogeny of primates, rodents, and canines as contentious.’’
Huttley et al. (2007) wrote in May 2007: ‘‘We have demonstrated
with very high confidence that the rodents diverged before car-
nivores and primates.’’ (See Niimura and Nei 2007 and Huerta-
Cepas et al. 2007 for other recent studies supporting the primate–
carnivore clade.) We therefore argue that the rearrangement-based
study of the primate–rodent–carnivore controversy is timely.
To analyze the primate–rodent–carnivore controversy, we
added the opossum genome (Mikkelsen et al. 2007) to our rear-
rangement analysis.13 However, while the phylogenetic tree of the
previously considered sixmammalian genomes is well established,
the position of the opossum genome in this tree is being debated
(Fig. 9). Supplemental Table S13 presents the statistics of the
breakpoint graph and reveals simple edges supporting the debated
tree topologies. Among the non-confident branches, the MRO +
DQHC branch (corresponding the primate–carnivore clade) is
supported by 50 multi-edges, while the DO + MRQHC branch
(corresponding to the primate–rodent clade) is supported by 32
multi-edges. We emphasize that only four out of 50 multi-edges
supporting the MRO + DQHC branch represent MRO multi-edges,
resulting in a very small number of simple MRO + DQHC vertices
(one simple vertex for the MRO + DQHC branch as compared to
zero simple vertices for the DO + MRQHC branch).
To further address the uncertainty with the opossum branch,
we applied MGRA only to the non-controversial parts of the tree
with the goal to find characters supporting each of two currently
debated tree topologies. The debated tree topologies share (non-
controversial) HC + MRDOQ, QHC + MRDO, and MR + DOQHC
branches (as well as seven leaf branches corresponding to single
genomes). We refer to these branches as ‘‘confident’’ and consider
only good and fair paths that correspond to confident branches in
MGRA analysis. To further compare the support for the primate–
carnivore and the primate–rodent clades, we run MGRA to sim-
plify this breakpoint graph. MGRA Stages 1–2 result in the
breakpoint graph (Supplemental Fig. S18, top) that encodes rear-
rangements during mammalian radiation.
While running MGRA on all seven genomes was important
for simplifying the initial breakpoint graph of seven genomes, it
hardly makes sense to analyze all these genomes in the complex
graph in Supplemental Figure S18 (top). Indeed, we are not in-
terested in subtle inconsistencies betweenmouse–rat and human–
chimpanzee–macaque genomic architectures revealed by this
graph. We therefore select single representatives of the primate
(macaque–human–chimpanzee ancestor), rodent (mouse–rat an-
cestor), and carnivore (dog) as well as the outgroup (opossum ge-
nome) to simplify the analysis (see Supplemental Fig. S18, top, for
a similar analysis with the representatives corresponding to extant
macaque, mouse, dog, and opossum genomes).
Table 1B allows one to analyze features supporting the pri-
mate–carnivore clade (26 multi-edges of MO + DQ multi-colors)
and the primate–rodent (12 multi-edges ofMQ +DOmulti-colors).
While the rearrangement-based support for the primate–carnivore
clade is more significant than for the primate–rodent clade (26 vs.
12 multi-edges), one cannot exclude a possibility that some
complex breakpoint reuse events skewed the statistics in Table 1B
in favor of the primate–carnivore clade (see Table 4A–C). Since the
elephant genome provides a better (less diverged) outgroup than
the opossum genome, there is a hope that the completion of the
elephant sequencing project may eventually lead to the resolution
of the primate–rodent–carnivore controversy.
We re-run MGRA on the set of seven genomes, assuming
the primate–carnivore topology.14 The resulting rearrangement
distances as well as 2-breaks assigned to the MRO + DQHC branch
(supporting the carnivore–primate split) are given in Supple-
ment H.
Discussion
Recently, Froenicke et al. (2006) expressed a concern about
some differences between the rearrangement-based and cytoge-
netics-based approaches to ancestral genome reconstruction. The
problem is that some important insights developed by the cyto-
genetics community still did not find their way into the genome
rearrangement tools like MGR, GRAPPA, inferCARs, and EMRAE.
While MGRA started as an attempt to close this gap, we quickly
realized that the problem of merging the cytogenetics-based and
rearrangement-based approaches is far from being simple. First,
Table 3. The genomic distances between the MRD
reconstructions MRDCARs and MRDMGRA and the genomes
M, R, D, Q, H, C
M R D Q H C Total
MRDCARs 303 656 180 124 122 133 1518
MRDMGRA 285 637 173 130 133 145 1503
13Adding the seventh genome increases the number of the synteny blocks to
1746 (by ;30%) but reduces the coverage of the genomes by the synteny
blocks from 89% to 79%. 14 In contrast, Ma et al. (2006) assumed the primate–rodent topology.
Alekseyev and Pevzner
954 Genome Research
www.genome.org
there is still no cytogenetics-based software that can be automat-
ically applied to genome-scale data sets to enable an unbiased
comparison of two approaches on the same data set. Second, it is
not clear how well the cytogenetics approach scales with increase
in the resolution, for example, with 1000+ synteny blocks from
Ma et al. (2006).
Despite the low resolution of the cytogenetics data, the
cytogenetics-based ancestral reconstructions are very accurate as
there are relatively few discrepancies between the cytogenetics-
based and the recent genomics-based high-resolution re-
constructions (Bourque et al. 2005; Murphy et al. 2005; Ma et al.
2006). Moreover, the discrepancies are usually attributed to
Figure 9. (Left panel) The primate–rodent–carnivore controversy: an alternative between the primate–rodent (green tree) and the primate–carnivore
clades (red tree). (Right panel) The phylogenetic tree T of seven mammalian genomes: mouse (red), rat (blue), dog (green), macaque (violet), human
(orange), chimpanzee (yellow), and opossum (brown). Since the opossum branch is subject to a controversy, the dashed branches represent possible
variations, while the solid branches are confident and do not depend on the opossum branch.
Table 4. The statistics of the breakpoint graph of the ancestral rodent (mouse–rat ancestor), ancestral primate
(macaque–human–chimpanzee ancestor), carnivore (dog), and opossum genomes
Multi-colors Multi-edges
Simple
vertices
Simple
multi-edges
Simple
paths + cycles
A. Before running MGRA
; + RPCO 0 + 627 = 627 0 0 + 0 = 0 0 + 0 = 0
O + RPC 617 + 740 = 1357 1230 613 + 523 = 1136 93 + 109 = 202
R + PCO 280 + 173 = 453 346 121 + 173 = 294 52 + 28 = 80
C + RPO 142 + 246 = 388 284 142 + 96 = 238 46 + 33 = 79
P + RCO 49 + 124 = 173 98 49 + 31 = 80 18 + 13 = 31
RO + PC 5 + 46 = 51 1 0 + 0 = 0 0 + 0 = 0
RP + CO 32 + 11 = 43 1 0 + 0 = 0 0 + 0 = 0
RC +PO 16 + 8 = 24 2 0 + 0 = 0 0 + 0 = 0
B. After MGRA Stage 1
; + RPCO 0 + 1712 = 1712 0 0 + 0 = 0 0 + 0 = 0
O + RPC 10 + 26 = 36 10 0 + 0 = 0 0 + 0 = 0
R + PCO 22 + 5 = 27 5 0 + 0 = 0 0 + 0 = 0
C + RPO 0 + 18 = 18 0 0 + 0 = 0 0 + 0 = 0
P + RCO 0 + 16 = 16 0 0 + 0 = 0 0 + 0 = 0
RO + PC 4 + 16 = 20 6 2 + 1 = 3 2 + 0 = 2
RP + CO 5 + 4 = 9 4 0 + 0 = 0 0 + 0 = 0
RC + PO 5 + 4 = 9 4 1 + 0 = 1 1 + 0 = 1
C. After MGRA Stage 2
; + RPCO 0 + 1743 = 1743 0 0 + 0 = 0 0 + 0 = 0
O + RPC 0 + 2 = 2 0 0 + 0 = 0 0 + 0 = 0
C + RPO 0 + 2 = 2 0 0 + 0 = 0 0 + 0 = 0
P + RCO 0 + 1 = 1 0 0 + 0 = 0 0 + 0 = 0
RO + PC 9 + 10 = 19 12 3 + 3 = 6 5 + 0 = 5
RC + PO 8 + 8 = 16 10 2 + 3 = 5 3 + 1 = 4
RP + CO 7 + 8 = 15 10 4 + 2 = 6 4 + 0 = 4
The ancestral rodent and primate ancestors were reconstructed using MGRA and were used as the genomes in the leaves of the phylogenetic tree for
four species: rodent, primate, dog, and opossum. The statistics are shown for before running MGRA, after MGRA Stage 1, and after MGRA Stage 2 run on
the leaf branches (i.e., without assuming any particular topology of the phylogenetic tree). The T-consistent multi-colors are shown in bold. Compare to
Table 1B and Supplemental Table S13.
Breakpoint graphs and ancestral reconstructions
Genome Research 955
www.genome.org
some arbitrary assignments of the genomics-basedMGR algorithm
(Froenicke et al. 2006) rather than errors in the cytogenetics
analysis. Indeed, MGR was developed for finding the most
parsimonious scenario rather than finding which rearrangements
in this scenario are less reliable than others. The discrepancies
between MGR and the cytogenetics-based reconstructions are
likely to be a reflection of the ‘‘strength in numbers’’ principle
rather than shortcomings of the genomics-based approaches:
while the cytogenetics reconstructions are based on more than
100 known cytogenetics maps, there are still only seven com-
pleted mammalian genomic sequences suitable for the rear-
rangement analysis. However, even with a small increase in the
number of the genomes from three to four (as in Bourque et al.
2004, 2005) to six to seven (as in Murphy et al. 2005; Ma et al.
2006), there are very few discrepancies between the cytogenetics-
based and the genomics-based approaches (Rocchi et al. 2006).
Despite a recent debate (Bourque et al. 2006; Froenicke et al.
2006), the cytogenetics-based and genomics-based approaches are
converging and benefiting from the higher resolution of the
genomics-based approaches. However, the key condition for such
convergence is the availability of algorithms that improve on the
existing heuristics for separating between strong and weak asso-
ciations. We addressed this challenge by devising the MGRA
algorithm, which remedies some limitations of the previous
approaches to ancestral reconstructions. Similarly to the algo-
rithms recently proposed by Ma et al. (2008) and Chauve and
Tannier (2008) (published after this paper was submitted), MGRA
focuses on accurate rather than the most parsimonious ancestral
reconstructions.
Acknowledgments
We thank Jian Ma for providing us with the synteny blocks for
mammalian genomes from the latest builds and for numerous
thoughtful discussions. We thank Bill Murphy for a discussion
about the primate–rodent–carnivore controversy, and Guillaume
Bourque and Glenn Tesler for discussions on the algorithmic
aspects of this project. We also thank Lutz Froenicke and Claus
Kemkemer for useful comments on the cytogenetics approach and
CytoAncestor. This work was supported by the Howard Hughes
Professor Award.
References
Alekseyev, M.A. 2008. Multi-break rearrangements and breakpoint re-
uses: From circular to linear genomes. J. Comput. Biol. 15: 1117–
1131.
Alekseyev, M.A. and Pevzner, P.A. 2007.Whole genome duplications, multi-
break rearrangements, and genome halving theorem. In Proceedings of
the 18th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pp.
665–679. SIAM, Philadelphia.
Alekseyev, M.A. and Pevzner, P.A. 2008. Multi-break rearrangements and
chromosomal evolution. Theor. Comput. Sci. 395: 193–202.
Amrine-Madsen, H., Koepfli, K.-P., Wayne, R.K., and Springer, M.S. 2003. A
new phylogenetic marker, apolipoprotein B, provides compelling
evidence for eutherian relationships. Mol. Phylogenet. Evol. 28: 225–
240.
Arnason, U., Adegoke, J.A., Bodin, K., Born, E.W., Esa, Y.B., Gullberg, A.,
Nilsson, M., Short, R.V., Xu, X., Janke, A., et al. 2002. Mammalian
mitogenomic relationships and the root of the eutherian tree. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 99: 8151–8156.
Bafna, V. and Pevzner, P.A. 1996. Genome rearrangement and sorting by
reversals. SIAM J. Comput. 25: 272–289.
Bafna, V. and Pevzner, P.A. 1998. Sorting permutations by transpositions.
SIAM J. Discrete Math. 11: 224–240.
Bailey, J., Baertsch, R., Kent, W., Haussler, D., and Eichler, E. 2004. Hotspots
of mammalian chromosomal evolution. Genome Biol. 5: R23. doi:
10.1186/gb-2004-5-4-r23.
Bergeron, A., Mixtacki, J., and Stoye, J. 2006. A unifying view of genome
rearrangements. Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 4175: 163–173.
Blanchette, M. and Tompa, M. 2002. Discovery of regulatory elements by
a computational method for phylogenetic footprinting. Genome Res.
12: 739–748.
Blanchette, M., Bourque, G., and Sankoff, D. 1997. Breakpoint phylogenies.
Genome Inform. Ser. Workshop Genome Inform. 8: 25–34.
Bourque, G. and Pevzner, P.A. 2002. Genome-scale evolution: Reconstructing
gene orders in the ancestral species. Genome Res. 12: 26–36.
Bourque, G., Pevzner, P.A., and Tesler, G. 2004. Reconstructing the genomic
architecture of ancestral mammals: Lessons from human, mouse, and
rat genomes. Genome Res. 14: 507–516.
Bourque, G., Zdobnov, E.M., Bork, P., Pevzner, P.A., and Tesler, G. 2005.
Comparative architectures of mammalian and chicken genomes reveal
highly variable rates of genomic rearrangements across different
lineages. Genome Res. 15: 98–110.
Bourque, G., Tesler, G., and Pevzner, P.A. 2006. The convergence of
cytogenetics and rearrangement-based models for ancestral genome
reconstruction. Genome Res. 16: 311–313.
Bulazel, K., Ferreri, G., Eldridge, M., and O’Neill, R. 2007. Species-specific
shifts in centromere sequence composition are coincident with
breakpoint reuse in karyotypically divergent lineages. Genome Biol. 8:
R170. doi: 10.1186/gb-2007-8-8-r170.
Caceres, M., Sullivan, R.T., and Thomas, J.W. 2007. A recurrent inversion
on the eutherian X chromosome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 104: 18571–
18576.
Cannarozzi, G., Schneider, A., and Gonnet, G. 2007. A phylogenomic study
of human, dog, and mouse. PLoS Comput. Biol. 3: e2. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pcbi.0030002.
Caprara, A. 1999a. Formulations and hardness of multiple sorting by
reversals. In RECOMB ’99: Proceedings of the Third Annual International
Conference on ComputationalMolecular Biology, pp. 84–93. ACM,NewYork.
Caprara, A. 1999b. On the tightness of the alternating-cycle lower bound
for sorting by reversals. J. Comb. Optim. 3: 149–182.
Cardone, M., Jiang, Z., D’Addabbo, P., Archidiacono, N., Rocchi, M., Eichler,
E., and Ventura, M. 2008. Hominoid chromosomal rearrangements on
17q map to complex regions of segmental duplication. Genome Biol. 9:
R28. doi: 10.1186/gb-2008-9-2-r28.
Chaisson, M.J., Raphael, B.J., and Pevzner, P.A. 2006. Microinversions in
mammalian evolution. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 103: 19824–19829.
Chauve, C. and Tannier, E. 2008. A methodological framework for the
reconstruction of contiguous regions of ancestral genomes and its
application to mammalian genomes. PLoS Comput. Biol. 4: e1000234.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000234.
Deuve, J., Bennett, N., Britton-Davidian, J., and Robinson, T. 2008.
Chromosomal phylogeny and evolution of the African mole-rats
(Bathyergidae). Chromosome Res. 16: 57–74.
Froenicke, L., Caldes, M.G., Graphodatsky, A., Muller, S., Lyons, L.A.,
Robinson, T.J., Volleth, M., Yang, F., and Wienberg, J. 2006. Are
molecular cytogenetics and bioinformatics suggesting diverging models
of ancestral mammalian genomes? Genome Res. 16: 306–310.
Gordon, L., Yang, S., Tran-Gyamfi, M., Baggott, D., Christensen, M.,
Hamilton, A., Crooijmans, R., Groenen, M., Lucas, S., Ovcharenko, I.,
et al. 2007. Comparative analysis of chicken chromosome 28 provides
new clues to the evolutionary fragility of gene-rich vertebrate regions.
Genome Res. 17: 1603–1613.
Graur, D. 1993. Towards a molecular resolution of the ordinal phylogeny of
the eutherian mammals. FEBS Lett. 325: 152–159.
Hannenhalli, S. and Pevzner, P. 1995. Transforming men into mouse
(polynomial algorithm for genomic distance problem). In Proceedings of
the 36th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pp. 581–
592.
Hannenhalli, S. and Pevzner, P. 1999. Transforming cabbage into turnip
(polynomial algorithm for sorting signed permutations by reversals).
JACM 46: 1–27.
Hinsch, H. and Hannenhalli, S. 2006. Recurring genomic breaks in
independent lineages support genomic fragility. BMC Evol. Biol. 6: 90.
doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-6-90.
Huerta-Cepas, J., Dopazo, H., Dopazo, J., and Gabaldon, T. 2007. The
human phylome. Genome Biol. 8: R109. doi: 10.1186/gb-2007-8-6-
r109.
Huttley, G.A., Wakefield, M.J., and Easteal, S. 2007. Rates of genome
evolution and branching order from whole genome analysis. Mol. Biol.
Evol. 24: 1722–1730.
Janke, A., Feldmaier-Fuchs, G., Thomas, W.K., von Haeseler, A., and Paabo,
S. 1994. The marsupial mitochondrial genome and the evolution of
placental mammals. Genetics 137: 243–256.
Jorgensen, F., Hobolth, A., Hornshoj, H., Bendixen, C., Fredholm, M., and
Schierup, M. 2005. Comparative analysis of protein coding sequences
from human, mouse and the domesticated pig. BMC Biol. 3: 2. doi:
10.1186/1741-7007-3-2.
Alekseyev and Pevzner
956 Genome Research
www.genome.org
Kellis, M., Patterson, N., Endrizzi, M., Birren, B., and Lander, E.S. 2003.
Sequencing and comparison of yeast species to identify genes and
regulatory elements. Nature 423: 241–254.
Kemkemer, C., Kohn, M., Kehrer-Sawatzki, H., Minich, P., Ho¨gel, J.,
Froenicke, L., and Hameister, H. 2006. Reconstruction of the ancestral
ferungulate karyotype by electronic chromosome painting (E-painting).
Chromosome Res. 14: 899–907.
Kikuta, H., Laplante, M., Navratilova, P., Komisarczuk, A.Z., Engstrom, P.G.,
Fredman, D., Akalin, A., Caccamo, M., Sealy, I., Howe, K., et al. 2007.
Genomic regulatory blocks encompass multiple neighboring genes
and maintain conserved synteny in vertebrates. Genome Res. 17: 545–
555.
Kumar, S. and Hedges, S.B. 1998. A molecular timescale for vertebrate
evolution. Nature 392: 917–920.
Lin, Y. and Moret, B.M. 2008. Estimating true evolutionary distances under
the DCJ model. Bioinformatics 24: i114–i122.
Lunter, G. 2007. Dog as an outgroup to human and mouse. PLoS Comput.
Biol. 3: e74. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030074.
Ma, J., Zhang, L., Suh, B.B., Raney, B.J., Burhans, R.C., Kent, J.W.,
Blanchette, M., Haussler, D., and Miller, W. 2006. Reconstructing
contiguous regions of an ancestral genome. Genome Res. 16: 1557–
1565.
Ma, J., Ratan, A., Raney, B.J., Suh, B.B., Miller, W., and Haussler, D. 2008.
The infinite sites model of genome evolution. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 105:
14254–14261.
Madsen, O., Scally, M., Douady, C.J., Kao, D.J., DeBry, R.W., Adkins, R.,
Amrine, H.M., Stanhope, M.J., de Jong,W.W., Springer, M.S., et al. 2001.
Parallel adaptive radiations in two major clades of placental mammals.
Nature 409: 610–614.
Mehan, M.R., Almonte, M., Slaten, E., Freimer, N.B., Rao, P.N., and Ophoff,
R.A. 2007. Analysis of segmental duplications reveals a distinct pattern
of continuation-of-synteny between human andmouse genomes.Hum.
Genet. 121: 93–100.
Mikkelsen, T.S., Wakefield, M.J., Aken, B., Amemiya, C.T., Chang, J.L., Duke,
S., Garber, M., Gentles, A.J., Goodstadt, L., Heger, A., et al. 2007.
Genome of the marsupial Monodelphis domestica reveals innovation in
non-coding sequences. Nature 447: 167–177.
Misawa, K. and Janke, A. 2003. Revisiting the Glires concept—Phylogenetic
analysis of nuclear sequences. Mol. Phylogenet. Evol. 28: 320–327.
Moret, B., Wyman, S., Bader, D.A., Warnow, T., and Yan, M. 2001. A new
implementation and detailed study of breakpoint analysis. In Pacific
Symposium on Biocomputing, pp. 583–594. Hawaii.
Moret, B.M.E., Siepel, A.C., Tang, J., and Liu, T. 2002. Inversion medians
outperform breakpoint medians in phylogeny reconstruction from
gene-order data. Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 2452: 521–536.
Murphy, W.J., Eizirik, E., Johnson, W.E., Zhang, Y.P., Ryder, O.A., and
O’Brien, S.J. 2001. Molecular phylogenetics and the origins of placental
mammals. Nature 409: 614–618.
Murphy, W.J., Larkin, D.M., van der Wind, A.E., Bourque, G., Tesler, G.,
Auvil, L., Beever, J.E., Chowdhary, B.P., Galibert, F., Gatzke, L., et al.
2005. Dynamics of mammalian chromosome evolution inferred from
multispecies comparative map. Science 309: 613–617.
Niimura, Y. and Nei, M. 2007. Extensive gains and losses of olfactory
receptor genes in mammalian evolution. PLoS One 2: e708. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0000708.
Ozery-Flato, M. and Shamir, R. 2003. Two notes on genome rearrangement.
J. Bioinform. Comput. Biol. 1: 71–94.
Pevzner, P.A. 2000. Computational molecular biology: An algorithmic approach.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Pevzner, P.A. and Tesler, G. 2003. Human and mouse genomic sequences
reveal extensive breakpoint reuse in mammalian evolution. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 100: 7672–7677.
Pontius, J.U., Mullikin, J.C., Smith, D.R., Lindblad-Toh, K., Gnerre, S.,
Clamp, M., Chang, J., Stephens, R., Neelam, B., Volfovsky, N., et al.
2007. Initial sequence and comparative analysis of the cat genome.
Genome Res. 17: 1675–1689.
Poux, C., van Rheede, T., Madsen, O., and de Jong, W.W. 2002. Sequence
gaps join mice and men: Phylogenetic evidence from deletions in two
proteins. Mol. Biol. Evol. 19: 2035–2037.
Reyes, A., Gissi, C., Pesole, G., Catzeflis, F.M., and Saccone, C. 2000. Where
do rodents fit? Evidence from the complete mitochondrial genome of
Sciurus vulgaris. Mol. Biol. Evol. 17: 979–983.
Reyes, A., Gissi, C., Catzeflis, F., Nevo, E., Pesole, G., and Saccone, C. 2004.
Congruent mammalian trees from mitochondrial and nuclear genes
using Bayesian methods. Mol. Biol. Evol. 21: 397–403.
Rocchi, M., Archidiacono, N., and Stanyon, R. 2006. Ancestral genomes
reconstruction: An integrated, multi-disciplinary approach is needed.
Genome Res. 16: 1441–1444.
Ruiz-Herrera, A., Castresana, J., and Robinson, T.J. 2006. Is mammalian
chromosomal evolution driven by regions of genome fragility? Genome
Biol. 7: R115. doi: 10.1186/gb-2006-7-12-r115.
Sankoff, D. and Blanchette, M. 1998. Multiple genome rearrangement and
breakpoint phylogeny. J. Comput. Biol. 5: 555–570.
Sankoff, D., Leduc, G., Antoine, N., Paquin, B., Lang, B.F., and Cedergren, R.
1992. Gene order comparisons for phylogenetic inference: Evolution of
the mitochondrial genome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 89: 6575–6579.
Shoshani, J. and McKenna, M.C. 1998. Higher taxonomic relationships
among extant mammals based on morphology, with selected
comparisons of results from molecular data. Mol. Phylogenet. Evol. 9:
572–584.
Tang, J. and Moret, B.M. 2003. Scaling up accurate phylogenetic
reconstruction from gene-order data. Bioinformatics 19: i305–i312.
Tannier, E. and Sagot, M.-F. 2004. Sorting by reversals in subquadratic time.
Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 3109: 1–13.
Tannier, E., Zheng, C., and Sankoff, D. 2008. Multichromosomal genome
median and halving problems. Lect. Notes Bioinformatics 5251: 1–13.
Tesler, G. 2002a. Efficient algorithms for multichromosomal genome
rearrangements. J. Comput. Syst. Sci. 65: 587–609.
Tesler, G. 2002b. GRIMM: Genome rearrangements web server.
Bioinformatics 18: 492–493.
Thomas, J.W., Touchman, J.W., Blakesley, R.W., Bouffard, G.G., Beckstrom-
Sternberg, S.M., Margulies, E.H., Blanchette, M., Siepel, A.C., Thomas,
P.J., McDowell, J.C., et al. 2003. Comparative analyses of multi-
species sequences from targeted genomic regions. Nature 424: 788–
793.
van der Wind, A.E., Kata, S.R., Band, M.R., Rebeiz, M., Larkin, D.M., Everts,
R.E., Green, C.A., Liu, L., Natarajan, S., Goldammer, T., et al. 2004. A
1463 gene cattle–human comparative map with anchor points defined
by human genome sequence coordinates. Genome Res. 14: 1424–
1437.
Webber, C. and Ponting, C.P. 2005. Hotspots of mutation and breakage in
dog and human chromosomes. Genome Res. 15: 1787–1797.
Wienberg, J. and Stanyon, R. 1997. Comparative painting of mammalian
chromosomes. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 7: 784–791.
Xia, A., Sharakhova, M., and Sharakhov, I. 2007. Reconstructing an
inversion history in the Anopheles gambiae complex. Lect. Notes
Bioinformatics 4751: 136–148.
Yancopoulos, S., Attie, O., and Friedberg, R. 2005. Efficient sorting of
genomic permutations by translocation, inversion and block
interchange. Bioinformatics 21: 3340–3346.
Yue, Y. andHaaf, T. 2006. 7E olfactory receptor gene clusters and evolutionary
chromosome rearrangements. Cytogenet. Genome Res. 112: 6–10.
Zhao, H. and Bourque, G. 2007. Recovering true rearrangement events on
phylogenetic trees. Lect. Notes Bioinformatics 4751: 149–161.
Zhao, H. and Bourque, G. 2009. Recovering genome rearrangements in the
mammalian phylogeny. Genome Res. (this issue). doi: 10.1101/
gr.086009.108.
Zhao, S., Shetty, J., Hou, L., Delcher, A., Zhu, B., Osoegawa, K., de Jong, P.,
Nierman, W.C., Strausberg, R.L., Fraser, C.M., et al. 2004. Human,
mouse, and rat genome large-scale rearrangements: Stability versus
speciation. Genome Res. 14: 1851–1860.
Received June 30, 2008; accepted in revised form January 22, 2009.
Breakpoint graphs and ancestral reconstructions
Genome Research 957
www.genome.org
